
If you’ve ever chased a cat that’s trying to avoid a bath, you have every right to conclude that, for our size, we humans are pretty poor runners. But chasing a cat is sprinting. Where we excel is endurance running. Moreover, we run long distances at fast speeds: many joggers do a mile in seven-and-a-half minutes, and top male marathoners can string five-minute miles together for more than two hours. A quadruped of similar weight, about 150 pounds, prefers to run a mile at a trot, which takes nine-and-a-half minutes, and would have to break into a gallop to keep pace with a good recreational jogger. That same recreational jogger could keep up with the preferred trotting speed of a thousand-pound horse.

Good endurance runners are rare among animals. Although humans share the ability with some other groups, such as wolves and dogs, hyenas, wildebeest, and horses, we alone among primates can run long distances with ease.

But what evidence can support the idea that endurance running by itself gave early humans an evolutionary advantage, and that it wasn’t just “piggybacking” on our ability to walk? Many traits, after all, are useful for both activities; long legs, for instance, and the long stride they enable, are helpful to walking as well as to running. But running and walking are mechanically different gaits. A walking person, aided by gravity, acts as an inverted pendulum: the hip swings over the planted foot [see “The Biomechanist Went over the Mountain,” by Adam Summers, November 2004]. In contrast, a runner bounces along, aided by tendons and ligaments that act as springs, which alternately store and release energy.

Bramble and Lieberman point to a number of features, preserved in fossils, that imply Homo adapted to a bouncy gait—whereas Australopithecus stuck with walking. Fossils lack tendons and ligaments, of course, but traces of their attachment points are sometimes present, and the characteristics of the missing tissue can be inferred by comparing how the attachments fitted with the rest of the animal’s anatomy. For example, the Achilles tendon, attached to the heel bone, is one of the most important elements in a human’s bouncy gait. In Australopithecus, however, the attachment point of the tendon is distinctly chimpanzee-like. Another spring occurs in the foot itself: tendons in the sole of a human’s foot keep it arched. The arch flattens and springs back with each step. In contrast, Lucy had only a partial arch. Homo habilis had a full arch. Chimpanzees have no arch at all.
In addition to springs, endurance running requires more stabilization of the trunk than walking does. Members of the genus Homo have substantial gluteus maximus (butt) muscles. Those muscles have numerous large attachments from the hip to the base of the spine. In Australopithecus fossils, though, the muscle has a much more limited area of attachment. If you’ve seen a chimpanzee in trousers, you know how baggy they look. Chimpanzees are gluteally challenged as well. Large butt muscles are not only better looking in pants; they also make for efficient energy transfer during running by stabilizing each hip. But the muscles are not used for walking on level ground.

In contrast with the trunk, the shoulder of the chimpanzee is well stabilized, tied to the spine and the head by several strong muscles. Lucy retained the stabilized shoulder, but in humans those muscle connections are less robust—and for good reasons. When we walk, our shoulders don’t move much, but when we run, because of the relatively loose attachment, the shoulders rotate strongly one way while the hips rotate the other. The counterrotations help keep us in balance. And because only one part of the trapezius muscle attaches to the head, we can swing the upper body without inadvertently rotating the head—which enables us to see where we’re going.

In spite of the loose attachment between head and shoulders, running joggles the head more than walking does. Homo therefore has several “antibobblehead” adaptations that other apes and Australopithecus lack. The first is a modification of the semicircular canals, the organs in each inner ear that tell the brain which way is up. Three such canals sit at right angles to one another in each inner ear. Two are enlarged in Homo, and the size makes it easier to sense, and presumably to counteract, a nodding head. An elastic ligament that runs from a ridge at the base of the skull to the base of the neck, damps the bobbing effect. Analogous ridge structures, to which damping ligaments can be attached, occur in dogs and horses, the other long distance runners, but not in Lucy.

Bramble and Lieberman’s wide-ranging analysis makes important corrections to the scientific picture of early humans. Our ancestors may have ranged across large distances in the heat of the African savanna in relatively short spurts of long-distance running, as well as by walking. They may have been trying to maximize the chance of encountering carrion before other scavengers did, or perhaps they were adapted to running down prey before spear throwers or bows were invented.

In any case, our current appetite for jogging is made possible by the early selective pressures that made humans one of the most accomplished endurance-running animals. For myself, though, I imagine another adaptation. The heat and the running must have been powerful motivators for our ancestors to sit in the shade and ponder how to affix a rock to a stick.



By day, gaudy reef fishes dominate the scene at a coral reef, but by night, invertebrates steal the show. Coral polyps—at least the ones that can't depend on nutrients provided by photosynthesizing symbiotic partners—extend their tentacles in the darkness to feed. Feather stars spread their arms, each grooved to direct the flow of food to the mouth. Spiny lobsters march on parade. And night is the time to get a good look at one of the shiest of all the reef dwellers: the brittle star.

Only at night does the brittle star venture out of its hiding place to snake across the surface of the reef because shining a light on an outstretched limb might just cause the animal to hide. The reaction has always intrigued me, because brittle stars have no obvious eyes. Nevertheless, they can detect light, and a team of investigators has now figured out how they do it. It turns out the dorsal side of the brittle star is covered with microscopic lenses embedded in its skeleton, making the entire back of the creature into a compound eye.

Brittle stars are echinoderms—relatives of sea stars and sea urchins—and can be distinguished from the other groups by their long, thin, highly flexible arms and their small central disk. But, like all echinoderms, they have a hard internal skeleton made up of small calcite plates, held together by catch connective tissue. It has been known for decades that some of these animals can sense light. In the 1980s Gordon Hendler, a zoologist at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, and Maria Byrne, a developmental biologist at the University of Sydney in Australia, pointed out that members of one brittle star species change from their nighttime color scheme of banded gray and black to deep brown in the daytime.

Responding to light does not require an eye. A sea snake in the subfamily Hydrophiinae, for instance, can perceive its tail being exposed as the snake forages on the reef, and move it out of the light. But that response would merely require the tail to have sensory neurons that respond to light—or to heat, the by-product of light on a dark surface. Some brittle stars, though, have responses to light that do seem to require an eye. When placed in bright sunlight, members of those species will make for a shadowed area as fast as their five little arms can carry them. Such behavior suggests they can detect shelter at a distance and even form an image of their surroundings.

Joanna Aizenberg, a materials scientist at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey; Alexei Tkachenko, a physicist now at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor; and Stephen Weiner and Lia Addadi, both structural biologists at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, teamed up with Hendler to examine the hidden eye of the brittle star. The investigators used a scanning electron microscope to look at skeletal calcite plates from the upper surface of a member of the light-sensitive brittle star species Ophiocoma wendtii. What they saw was an unusual pattern of densely packed, crystal-clear bumps, each thinner than a human hair. Similar plates from a non-light-sensitive species (O. pumila) had no such bumps, and neither did plates from the underside of the arms of O. wendtii.

Might the bumps serve as lenses to focus light? Aizenberg and her colleagues established good theoretical reasons for thinking they could. The calcite crystal that makes up a bump is aligned so as to conduct light from the outside surface of the plate to the inside surface. Furthermore, because the bumps are not perfect spheres, they don't have the blurriness characteristic of spherical lenses. By measuring the shape and size of the bumps, the investigators calculated that they would focus light between four and seven micrometers (just a few ten-thousandths of an inch) beyond their inner surface.

Maria Byrne had previously examined a plate and surrounding tissue with a transmission electron microscope and found a bundle of nerves at the appropriate distance—at the calculated focal point—from each bump. Cells containing pigment reside alongside and below each bump. During the day, however, the pigmented cells migrate to the upper surface of the calcite ossicles, where they shield the top of the lens from the bright sun and, incidentally, darken the animal. The color change is not a camouflage response; rather, it is the echinoderm version of sunglasses.

Following up this work, Aizenberg exposed a sheet of film to light passing through the presumed array of lenses. Her results were striking. A small spot of light hit the film under each bump. The size of each spot varied with the size of the bump, and the brightness of the spot depended on the incident angle of the light with respect to the surface of the brittle star arm. In other words, each tiny, embedded bump acts as a directional light sensor, responding most strongly to light coming from a particular direction. The bump is thus a rudimentary lens.

If the brittle star had just one such lens on each arm, it could look around by waving an arm and assessing the patterns of light and dark. But the resolving power of a brittle star lens is extremely limited: relying on one would be a bit like looking through a peephole covered with tissue paper. Because the dorsal surface of the brittle star is covered with thousands of tiny “eyes,” though, and each eye receives light from a slightly different direction and angle, the entire surface can act as one large compound eye. That compounding makes it possible, in some sense, for the brittle star to take in the whole scene. A computer monitor is a useful analogy. A single pixel holds information about the color and brightness of a single part of an image. But an entire array of pixels yields a coherent picture.

The brittle star's eye is a wonderful example of how basic science—in this case Hendler and Byrne's natural-historical observations—can give applied scientists insight into a problem with clear commercial impact. Investigators at Lucent Technologies (of which Bell Labs is a part) are excited because the brittle star makes better, smaller lenses than they do. They hope to learn the secret of depositing a well-patterned crystalline matrix, so they can then shrink fiber-optic junctions and advance toward the goal of building a completely optical computer. As for me, I know I'll never again look at a brittle star in quite the same way—now that I know they're looking back!



If you could travel back in time some 370 million years and snorkel over shallow reefs in Devonian seas, you would, of course, see alien creatures—the antiarchs (armored fishes), perhaps a long-snouted lungfish, and the spiral shells of ammonites. But your most startling encounter would probably be with an all-too-familiar creature: the ancient shark Cladoselache. Its fusiform, or spindle-shaped, body—between three and six feet long—and sharp, multicusped teeth might evoke the same frisson that shark divers so enjoy today.

The survival of the shark, in a form relatively unchanged for hundreds of millions of years, attests to the utility of its body plan. Holding evolution at bay for so long requires flexibility. A shrewd recent observation of shark feeding behavior has led to the realization that some species, perhaps including some very ancient ones, can change their teeth as they change their diet.

Most people's impressions of sharks are dominated by Jaws-type images of school bus-size creatures cutting through the water with their fearsome mouths agape, exposing their jagged teeth before gnashing down on some hapless creature. Most shark predation—the mako's quick lunge at a tuna or the surreptitious sideways snatch of the sand tiger shark—is far less showy.

Some cartilaginous fishes shun fishy prey altogether, preferring creatures that may be harder to process but easier to catch, such as brittle stars, crabs, and sea urchins. The dietary preferences of a species can be inferred by examining its teeth. Triangular teeth, good for cutting and slashing, belong to sharks that eat things larger than their heads; a battery of grasping spikes works well for those wanting to snatch up fish; and a pavement of closely set knobs does the job of crushing hard prey.

The white-spotted bamboo shark (Chiloscyllium plagiosum) is a small, spotted shark native to the Indo-Pacific. It is popular in aquariums because it is usually a willing feeder and lays eggs in captivity. Cheryl A.D. Wilga and her graduate student Jason Ramsay, both marine biologists at the University of Rhode Island in Kingston, maintain a small colony of bamboo sharks for Wilga's research on shark feeding and swimming. One day, instead of feeding the sharks their usual soft diet of squid and fish, Ramsay tossed in a few small New England crabs. To his surprise, the sharks not only eagerly gobbled up the unusual fare but also spat out pieces of shell. Ramsay realized that the sharks had smashed the crabs instead of swallowing them whole.

In the wild, bamboo sharks have a catholic diet that includes small fish as well as a variety of benthic invertebrates such as crab and shrimp. Their teeth seem to reflect their generalist approach to dinner: they are sharp, small, and ideal for gripping and then, through vigorous head shaking, tearing prey into chunks. But sharp teeth seem entirely at odds with the need to crush prey. How could delicate points avoid taking a beating every time the shark chooses a well-armored meal? With a combination of high-speed video, dissections, and experiments that showed the mobility of the teeth relative to the jaws, Ramsay got to the root of the problem.

shark teeth diagram
Teeth of the white-spotted bamboo shark remain erect when they tear into a fleshy fish (left). When the teeth hit something hard, though (right), they fold down to form a flat dental plate, suitable for crushing hard-shelled prey.
Emily S. Damstra
Shark enthusiasts have long known that sharks have several rows of teeth, all embedded in an elastic dental ligament that, like a conveyor belt, slowly carries the teeth forward from the back of the mouth toward the lip. The frontmost teeth do the biting and chewing; the rows toward the back stay down and out of the way until they reach the front of the mouth. At the same time, though, teeth are constantly being replaced: as the older, front-row teeth break or wear down, they are carried out of the mouth, and the next row of younger teeth moves to the front.
The elasticity of the dental ligament gives shark teeth another unusual property: they can wiggle a bit to fit around bone or skip over hard parts of prey. The bamboo shark takes advantage of this mobility, enabling its teeth to do double duty.

When the bamboo shark’s teeth hit soft flesh, the sharp cusps bite in and grasp the prey. A quick shake of the shark’s head can then rip the prey in half. But when the shark grabs hard-bodied prey, the sharp points can’t make a dent. So instead of letting their edges get dulled on shell, the teeth fold toward the back of the shark’s mouth, exposing the front surfaces of the teeth to the prey [see illustration right]. The flat tooth face is far better suited to the task of smashing open a crab. Imagine your own teeth tilting backward if you bit a walnut shell, but staying upright on contact with a peach.

The beauty of the system is that no special controls are needed to “decide” whether the prey to be processed is hard or soft. The hardness of the prey itself causes the teeth to change from pointy graspers to lumpy crushers. If the prey is hard, the upright front row folds down onto the next row back, turning the entire dental battery into a crushing plate, similar to the palate of true hard-prey specialists such as the horn shark.

The teeth of the bamboo shark look remarkably similar to those of Elegestolepis, one of the oldest known fossil sharks. Perhaps, then, the shark’s all-purpose strategy is quite old. But it’s not universal—great white sharks have no trouble cutting through surfboards with a static set of dentures, and tiger sharks rip through sea-turtle carapaces like chainsaws through pine.




My mother is a rock climber, the familial human fly. She practices endlessly on walls and cliffs, refining her ability to stick to vertical surfaces and overhangs. Watching her, I’ve had plenty of time to contemplate the biomechanics of her gravity defiance. As she glides up a wall and then spiders along upside down across a “roof” section at a local gym, her aerial ballet testifies to the powers of friction and adhesion. In fact, the same interplay of forces enables a real fly to stick to walls. One day human climbers may borrow some of the fly’s tricks for holding fast.

Fortunately for the fly, nothing in nature is perfectly flat and smooth; any interaction between surfaces is really a story of bumps hitting lumps. Friction is the force that results when the bumps on one surface smack into and snag on the lumps of another. Adhesion, a close cousin to friction, is the result of the molecular attraction between two materials as they are being pulled apart. Usually, though not always, increasing the adhesion between two surfaces increases the friction, too. Together these forces enable flies to walk just about anywhere.

Stanislav Gorb and his research group at the Max Planck Institute for Metals Research in Stuttgart, Germany, have examined the footfalls of dozens of insect species. With electron microscopy, high-speed video, and clever devices for measuring forces, Gorb’s group has looked at how these creepy crawlers attach and detach themselves from surfaces. Flies, beetles, and thousands of other insects depend on a system of hairs to hang on. For all their clinging power, though, sticky feet do exact a cost: the better the fly sticks to a surface, the harder it is to get unstuck.

Under the electron microscope you can see that a fly’s foot ends in a soft pad covered with tiny hairs, called tenent setae. Each hair terminates in a delicate spatula that maximizes the contact area of the foot by flattening against the surface on which it stands [see micrograph below]. Increasing the contact area increases the frictional forces that keep the foot rooted down. Rock climbers, too, try to increase surface area for a better hold by “smearing,” or spreading the balls of their feet over rocks.

But flies do something even more active and interesting to get a grip, as Gorb’s group found. By flash-freezing surfaces where flies had been walking, the researchers highlighted the sweaty little footprints that flies leave wherever they go. Under pressure, the flies’ footpads secrete an emulsion that, like ice cream, is a mixture of sugars and oils; the goop coats the tenent setae and creates a strong bond between hair and surface through capillary adhesion. This form of adhesion is familiar to anyone who has ever found an advertising flyer on the windshield: a dry one flutters off, whereas soggy paper clings stubbornly to the glass, even while you drive down the highway.

fly foot diagram
Flies have four ways of detaching a foot from a surface, as Stanislav Gorb and his group observed. A fly can push a foot away from its body, causing the footpads to fold up and lift free (a); twist its footpads free (b); peel off the back of its footpads by planting its claws and rocking its foot forward (c); or simply yank backward, scraping its claws across the top of its footpads (d).
Tom Moore
That same stubborn adhesion presents a problem for the fly. If its feet stuck too well to whatever it landed on, it would have to just stay put and order room service. So how does it get unstuck? Gorb watched hundreds of videotaped detachment events at a slow speed. What he found is that the fly has not one strategy, but four, for freeing up a stuck foot. Pushing the foot away from the body tends to scrunch up the footpads, popping them free. The other options are twisting the pads loose, prying them up with the help of two little claws on the end of the foot, or simply yanking them away from the surface with brute force.
No fly in its right mind is going to want to go to all that trouble unless it’s absolutely necessary. Usually, when walking on a ceiling or a wall, the fly has a relatively slow gait because four of its feet are attached to the surface at any one time. On the ground, though, flies can save energy by walking like most other insects, with only three feet on the ground. The insect’s six legs form alternating tripods, with the body supported by a fore and a hind limb on one side, in concert with the middle limb on the other. The ground gait is the six-legged equivalent of a trotting horse that has two feet planted at a time—and, just as a trot is faster than a walk, the trotting fly is a faster fly.

The damp nature of fly-foot contact has other consequences as well. In high humidity and under strong pressure, the fluid between the tenent setae can act like grease, causing the foot to slide. So flies have adopted a cockeyed strategy for hanging onto walls. If a fly stood vertically on a wall, the forces on its footpads would tend to detach the setae. Next time one lands on a fridge door near you, notice that the fly stands at an angle. In that position, the setae are pulled in the direction of strongest attachment—diagonally. For the same reason, the hardest thing for flies to do is walk headfirst down a wall; they can do it, but they are barely hanging on.

Gorb’s group is now working on patterning various materials to scale fly feet up to human size. With photolithography and laser drills they etch a mold of tenent-setae look-alikes, then pour in a liquid polymer that solidifies into a flat sheet studded with hundreds of thousands of tiny, flanged columns. These prototypes have a long way to go before any of them is ready for wall walking. But I’m certain my mom will be first in line for a full set of fly feet.



Reproduction usually involves routing very small particles—sperm, eggs, and spores—away from the site where they were created. Diverse solutions to the basic transport problem have evolved, such as sticky pollen that is picked up by insects, and moss gametes that are readily carried by water. The methods of transport that most intrigue me are ballistic: the catapulting of spores by ferns and the cannonlike firing of fungal spores.

An object launched ballistically is accelerated to an initial velocity, and then drag acts to slow it, causing it to fall more steeply than it climbs. For heavy flying objects the effect of drag is minimal. But for small, lightweight ones, drag is hard to overcome. Roger Clemens has no problems pitching a baseball, but even his rocket arm could not get a dried pea from the mound to home plate.

Similarly, it takes tremendous muzzle velocity to shoot a spore—a speck just one-tenth the width of the periods on this page—the length of your thumbnail. The biomechanical mechanism that has evolved to do so resembles a catapult. Robbin Moran, the fern boffin at the New York Botanical Garden, knows the details of spore shooting, as well as some intriguing properties of water, the agent that both loads the catapult and triggers the launch.

A parental fern grows, protects, and ultimately ejects its spores from a stalked structure: the sporangium. To visualize its ballistic mechanism, imagine holding a small pile of peas in the palm of your hand and gently closing your fist. Further imagine that a thin, steel spring has been rigged along the inside surface of your bent middle finger. If some force were to pry open your fist, allowing the peas to roll to your fingertips, the force would stretch and load the piece of spring. Removing the force suddenly would cause your fingers to snap shut, flinging peas everywhere.

The fern equivalent of the spring and middle finger is the annulus, a row of cells that bisects the sporangium like a sturdy spine. The annulus has heavily reinforced inner walls and thin outer walls that are permeable to water. As the sporangium dries, evaporating water is drawn out from the cells of the annulus, causing the cells to shrink. The thick, inner cell walls don't collapse, but the outer walls start to buckle. The process causes the curved surface of the annulus to shorten, thereby prying the sporangium open.

fern diagram
Sporangium encases the spores of a fern (a). Water evaporates through the thin cell walls of the annulus cells (along the spine of the structure), shortening one side of the sporangium's arm and ratcheting it back into a primed position (b,c). Because the thick inner walls of the annulus cells resist collapse, the water pressure inside the cells drops and bubbles form in the liquid. The bubbles pop the cell walls outward, thereby restoring the arm to its original form and launching the spores (d,e).
Tom Moore
Now the spores are exposed, but they still cling to the surface of the primed sporangium. The column of water trapped in the annulus's cells is under progressively greater tension as water evaporates through the thin outer cell walls. But the thick inner walls continue to resist collapse, and so the water pressure inside the cell drops. When the pressure drops below a certain threshold, dissolved air or water vapor form a gas bubble in the liquid. The formation of such a bubble is called cavitation.

When one such bubble forms, it disturbs its neighboring cells enough to set off a chain reaction of bubble formation along the annulus. The fat air bubbles in the cells make the cell walls snap back into their pre-evaporation positions, firing spores in all directions.

That is a pretty slick solution to the problem of accelerating a small object quickly, but certain fungi have the fern catapult outgunned. Frances Trail and Iffa Gaffoor, both biomechanists at Michigan State University in East Lansing, teamed up with the biomechanist Steven Vogel of Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, to show how one fungus uses water in a different way to fire its spores. By their measurements, the fungus shoots with the highest relative velocity and greatest acceleration of any known biological entity.

fruiting body
Fruiting body, or perithecium, of the Gibberella zeae fungus houses hundreds of asci, each containing eight spores. The asci pump themselves full of water by osmosis, eventually building up enough pressure to shoot spores out through their small openings and into the air.
Tom Moore
Gibberella zeae, the new powerhouse spore launcher, is a fungal pathogen of wheat. Its spores are spindle-shaped and small enough that five of them would fit end to end across the cut tip of a human hair. Eight spores are packed into a pod-shaped, fluid-filled capsule called an ascus, and hundreds of asci are, in turn, crammed into a pimplelike organ called a perithecium [see illustration right].

To begin the firing process, each ascus produces a high internal concentration of mannitol, a slightly sweet alcohol. The mannitol draws water by osmosis out of the surrounding tissue and into the ascus, causing it to swell. As it swells, the ascus elongates, so that it points toward the small central opening in the perithecium.

The “skin” of the ascus is now taut enough that a further influx of water will raise the internal pressure. And pressure is just what is needed to fire the spores from a pinprick-size pore in the ascus. But the ascus has a further osmotic trick to raise the pressure much higher: it pumps potassium and chloride ions from the outside to the inside, and the ions draw in yet more water. The pressure in the ascus rises as high as five atmospheres. Suddenly, the tip of the ascus bursts. Spores and fluid spurt into the air over a distance of . . . less than a quarter inch. The spent ascus retreats back down inside the perithecium and a newly bloated ascus comes up.

A quarter inch may not seem very far, but it is more than enough to launch the lightweight spores into air currents that can carry them to a new home. The force on the spores initially accelerates them at an astonishing 870,000 times the acceleration of gravity. They reach speeds of eighty miles an hour, or nearly 2 million spore lengths per second.

The instant the spores are fired, however, they hit the air as if it were made of concrete. A spore leaving the perithecium travels nearly straight up at first. Then, its forward momentum spent, it drops nearly straight down. And the smaller the spores, the less their flight paths look like a parabola, and the more they resemble the path of a marble falling off a table. Despite the temptations of superacceleration, though, it seems unlikely that the Department of Defense will go scurrying any time soon for ways to scale-up a spore launcher into a working gun.




Until recently I would have bet I could tell a fast fish from a slow one by looking at the placement of its fins and the shape of its body. Boxfishes, with their fins at the corners of their “boxy” bodies, would not have made my list of speedsters on either count. But it turns out that boxfishes are fast, stable, and amazingly maneuverable swimmers—so much so as to inspire human designers.

Boxfishes get their name from the rectangular (or sometimes five-sided) shell of bony armor on the front two-thirds of their bodies. The eyes, mouth, and fins poke through holes in the covering, but otherwise the fish’s body surface is an uninterrupted mosaic of hexagonal tiles of bone.

The edges of the bony box act as keels, running nearly the entire length of the fish. In some boxfishes, such as the aptly named cowfishes, the keels extend forward, beyond the body, to form sharp horns. Like its relative the puffer fish, the boxfish propels itself by waving its dorsal fin (on top of its body )and its anal fin (on the bottom), and it steers primarily with its pectoral fins and tail fin. Both dorsal and anal fins are situated well to the rear of the fish.

I assumed the hydrodynamic properties of a boxfish were comparable to those of a square compact car or an SUV—a vehicle that’s good for carrying loads, with neither speed nor agility. But Ian K. Bartol, a biologist at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia, and a multidisciplinary team of investigators have proved, once again, the limits of intuition. First, they point out, far from being slowpokes, boxfishes can scoot over a reef at six body lengths per second—an impressive speed by any standard. Moreover, Bartol and company managed to visualize the flow of water around a boxfish by placing neutrally buoyant beads in the water and filming the beads as they swept past plastic models of the fish. They found, with their models, that the drag of the boxfish is surprisingly low, as expressed by a dimensionless quantity known as its drag coefficient. The drag coefficient of the boxfish is just 0.2, which is comparable to some streamlined airfoils, and falls well below 1.5, the drag coefficient of a flat-faced box.

At first glance, those hydrodynamic properties are puzzling. The dorsal and anal fins, which push the fish along, are way off the central axis of its body, yet the animal swims a straight path without rocking up and down. That would seem to require either perfect coordination of two fins of widely differing shape and size, or a trick that somehow imparts stability to the fish without slowing it down.

blowfish diagram
When the boxfish swims up (top), spiral vortices develop above its four “edges,” or keels. The vortices create a low-pressure zone, strongest at the rear of the fish, which tends to pull the tail end of the fish up (yellow arrows) and so help keep it level and stable. In a downward dive (bottom), the boxfish generates vortices below its four keels. The low pressures in the vortices help pull the tail end of the fish down (yellow arrows).
Tom Moore
Bartol and his colleagues found that the secret to the dynamic stability of the boxfish lies in the keels that form the edges of the box. The keels set up strong spiral vortices of water that flow along the keels, hugging close to the surface of the fish and intensifying at the rear end. When the fish tilts nose-up, the vortices develop above the keels; when it tilts down, the vortices form below the keels [see illustrations left].
The pressure of the water in these swirling vortices is lower than it is in the undisturbed fluid around the fish. Hence as the nose tilts up, a low-pressure vortex above the keels tends to pull the body upward, leveling it. Similarly, as the nose goes down, the vortices below the keels tend to counteract the upward tilt of the tail end. The pectoral fins, furthermore, are well placed to interrupt or adjust the vortices, and those fins can also act to stabilize the body or propel the fish into a speedy turn.

The beauty of the fish’s solution to the problem of propulsion and stabilization is that the functioning of the keels is entirely passive. In other words, it requires no active control from the fish. The vortices automatically stabilize a motion that might otherwise lead to very inefficient head bobbing. Not only is little energy required of the fish, but there are also no complex neural circuits needed for control; a clever set of immovable strakes, shaping the body from stem to stern, lets geometry, and fluid dynamics, do all the work “for free.”

car model
Computer-generated model of a car with design elements inspired by the hydrodynamically efficient boxfish.
Tom Moore
Mercedes-Benz has already taken note of this nice combination of load carrying and low drag. In fact, the boxfish is the basis for the automobile company’s latest concept car. The result is a boxfish on wheels, with headlights, windows, and a very slippery drag coefficient of just 0.19—comparable to an airfoil. The vehicle even emulates the hexagonal tiles of the fish’s carapace to create strong, lightweight doors. The producers of the next James Bond movie might take a cue from the new design: this car would be an agile underwater performer, with built-in armor and lots of cargo space for spy gear.




It’s said that the legendary Finn MacCool created the Giant’s Causeway—thousands of steplike stones on Ireland’s northeast coast—in order to reach Scotland and thrash an upstart rival. As a child living in Dublin, I was fascinated by this myth. As an adult, I am intrigued by the true origin of this geologic formation: black basaltic rock that cracked into uniform columns after a volcanic eruption, 60 million years ago. And as a biomechanist, I am delighted that the same physical phenomena that led to the Giant’s Causeway can also explain information exchange at the opposite end of the size spectrum, across strands of DNA.

DNA does not remain quietly coiled in the nucleus of a cell. Instead, it goes through cycles of unraveling and compaction, most dynamically during the process of meiosis. Meiosis is a kind of cell division that produces gametes—sperm cells and egg cells—from germ-line cells; no topic brings on cold sweats in biology students quite like it.

Human nuclear DNA is organized into twenty-three pairs of chromosomes, one member of each pair from an egg cell of the mother and the other member from a sperm cell of the father. The genetic information in a pair of chromosomes is not identical, but (with the sole exception of the two sex chromosomes in the male) the genes on both chromosomes are homologous, being arrayed in the same order. For example, a gene for eye color occurs on both members of one of the pairs of chromosomes, but one copy might code for blue eyes and the other for brown eyes.

When a germ-line cell undergoes meiosis, the forty-six individual chromosomes perform a complicated dance in which the DNA is first replicated and, ultimately, divided up into four gamete cells—each with just twenty-three chromosomes. The part of the process immediately following replication, a part that is key to genetic diversity, is what makes the heart of the biomechanist beat faster.

After replication, chromosomal DNA and the proteins closely associated with it “condense,” or compress, and the new and old copies of each chromosome form a tightly wound X-shaped package (not to be confused with the X chromosome). Each X shape then finds its genetically similar partner. Together, the twenty-three pairs of Xs line up along a central axis of the cell.

The next step is “crossing over,” one of the hallmarks of meiosis: the pairs of Xs become entangled. A region on one chromosome (on an arm of one of the Xs) appears to cross over, and stick to, the homologous region on one of the chromosomes that make up the other X shape in the pair [see illustration below]. Wherever crossover occurs, DNA is exchanged between the two chromosomes.

crossover dna
Crossover of genetically similar pairs of chromosomes during meiosis, as shown in the diagram, gives rise to diverse gametes. Each chromosome is replicated, and the original plus its copy are compressed into the shape of an X. Thus each genetically similar chromosome pair leads to two X shapes (red and blue Xs above). Homologous, or genetically similar, regions of the Xs then become entangled and interchange, giving rise to four new chromosomes. The interchange of chromosomal material, such as the sequence shown within the labeled boxes of the diagram, may be caused by mechanical stress and breakage, as detailed in the corresponding boxes of the diagram, above.
Tom Moore
Once the genetic exchanges have taken place, the four chromosomes that make up a pair of Xs separate from one another. Thus, the chromosomes that wind up in the nucleus of a new gamete are distinct from the chromosomes in the parent cell; this outcome makes crossing over a major source of genetic variation among offspring. Later, if an egg and sperm happen to combine, the cell that results, called a zygote, contains the original complement of twenty-three pairs of chromosomes—half of every pair coming from the egg and the other half from the sperm.

Each human chromosome, on average, has about two crossover sites. Geneticists thought the location of those sites was determined by so-called chaperone molecules, or perhaps simply by random encounters. But Nancy Kleckner, a molecular biologist at Harvard University, and her colleagues have supplied convincing evidence that crossovers are also the by-products of mechanical processes.

At least one crossover is needed for proper assortment of chromosome pairs, yet the location of the crossover site is not the same in every cell that undergoes meiosis. In other words, there are no preset sites for crossovers in any given chromosome. Another odd fact of crossover distribution leads back to the Giant’s Causeway: it turns out that every crossover lowers the chances that a second crossover site occurs nearby. Something about a crossover seems to inhibit the formation of neighboring crossovers.

The Giant’s Causeway started off as a thick layer of volcanic ejecta. As the lava solidified and cooled, it contracted, but the surface layers, exposed to the air, cooled faster than the deeper layers. Hence the surface layers also contracted faster, setting up a tensile stress that could be relieved only by cracking along the surface.

Once a crack formed, though, it relieved tension in the surrounding area, preventing other cracks from forming immediately nearby. At some distance from the first crack, however, the tension would still be high enough to cause another crack to form. The differential cooling led to the hexagonal pattern of cracking visible today. Stress relief provided by a crack explains the appearance of myriad structures, from the crackling of old paint to the crevices that plague Vermont roadways.

But what generates stresses in a chromosome analogous to the stresses in cooling lava? Kleckner proposes several factors that could be acting in concert. First, during the meiotic cycle, the chromosomes condense into more tightly looped skeins of DNA. That compression could set up stresses simply by confining the DNA to a smaller space—possibly causing the DNA to stiffen as well. Second, because DNA is also replicating during meiosis, there is simply more DNA trying to fit into the constant volume of the cell nucleus. Chromosomes might be pushing against the walls of the nucleus—or against each other—so hard that they buckle under the stress.

Kleckner and her colleagues tested a theoretical model, which predicted where such mechanical stresses would cause “cracks” along a chromosome, against maps of observed crossover points—and found the model to hold true. Furthermore, micrographs of chromosomes show clear evidence of stress buildup. Some are twisted like phone cords; others have sharp flexures from buckling.

If there were not enough stress built up in a chromosome to ensure at least one crossover event, chromosome pairs would not separate properly. That possibility alone is a powerful selective force for a stressful environment. In this case it is important to crack, as they say, under pressure.




I turned forty recently. Of all the gifts I received, the most surprising and rewarding birthday present came from my wife: a three-day hike in the Sierra Nevada. My declaration of midlife vigor included a scamper up to 11,000 feet—a chance to go over a literal mountain rather than the metaphorical hill. But the thin air made me take plenty of time to rest on trailside rocks, which inevitably led the biomechanist in me to reflect on the mechanics of hill climbing.

It seemed that the steeper sections of the trail quickly exhausted my reserves, but that the less steep sections did not get me up the hill fast enough to make satisfactory progress. As it turns out, I’m not the first to have noticed this: studies of human locomotion—not to mention numberless hikers before me—have come to the same conclusion.

Some of the first serious investigations of human walking were done in the late 1930s by Rodolfo Margaria, an Italian physiologist, who measured its metabolic costs at various inclines. His data showed that the optimum grade was, unsurprisingly, downhill. At an incline of about minus ten degrees, roughly the same angle as the wheelchair-access ramp at many curbs, people use the least amount of oxygen to walk a given distance with their natural gait.

What may be surprising is that the energy expenditure isn’t minimized at a steeper incline. After all, isn’t it obvious that getting downhill faster should also be metabolically easier? Well, it’s not, and the reason the ten-degree incline is the easiest lies in the mechanics of walking.

Walking is a cyclic movement, and in any cyclic movement there is the possibility of energy storage and reuse. Your center of gravity (which lies approximately two inches in front of the small of your back) rises and falls with each step. It is highest when one foot is planted firmly on the ground directly beneath you. Then it drops as your body swings forward with the next step and rises again as your other leg passes through the vertical. Each stride represents the sweep of an energy-saving, inverted pendulum.

Imagine that your center of gravity is a steel ball attached to a steel rod, which can represent your planted leg, because during that part of the cycle your knee hardly bends. Your planted foot is the pivot of the pendulum. If you trace the path of the steel ball through a stride, it follows the arc of a single sweep of a pendulum.

walking
Video sequences of a man walking show the bobbing course of his center of gravity (white circle along red curve). As he walks on flat ground (first sequence), his center of mass acts like the mass at the end of an inverted pendulum (broken lines), storing some of the energy of motion of each step as the mass rises and releasing the energy as it falls. Some of the energy of motion remains available for subsequent steps as the slope he climbs increases to a five-degree angle (second sequence), but all the energy is used up in finishing the current step when the angle is fifteen degrees (third sequence).
Tom Moore
In a pendulum system the kinetic energy of the ball as it passes through the lowest part of its swing is traded for the gravitational potential energy of height as it rises to the top of its arc. As the ball falls, the potential energy is then converted back into kinetic energy. Your planted leg, because it acts as the radius of a circle, translates the downward force of gravity into a force pushing you forward. As you might expect, your forward speed is lowest when your planted leg is directly below your center of gravity, and highest when you are striding. At that moment, your forward leg, now planted, acts as the radius of a new circle and translates some of the momentum of your center of gravity into upward motion, preparing you for another gravity-aided step forward.

About 60 percent of the energy spent changing the altitude of a walker’s center of gravity is conserved. Walking on a slight downhill grade adds energy to the system; that energy offsets some of the energy lost to heat generated in the muscles. (On steeper downhill grades the pendulum motion is lost. The cost of each step rises, though not by much.)

But what about uphill? Alberto E. Minetti, an Italian biomechanist at Manchester Metropolitan University in England, recast Margaria’s data in real-world terms. Minetti noted that walkers don’t usually choose the slope at which each step costs the least because they are usually glad to trade a quick gain in altitude for the cost of a little extra fatigue.

In my case, according to my topographic maps, I needed to climb 1,108 feet on the final push to the summit. The shortest route would be the “directissima”—a vertical ascent, much as a spider might do it. Such a route—because metabolic rate rises rapidly with increasing slope—would be hugely expensive. What about a gentler slope—say an angle of about five degrees? That grade would barely rise, but I would have to walk nearly two-and-a-half miles to gain those 1,100 feet. The net cost of taking the “easy” way would be high simply because I would have to walk so far to reach the summit.

Minetti discovered the best solution. When the slope of the route is about fifteen degrees, a rise of about a foot for every four feet of horizontal travel, the energy required to gain a certain altitude is minimized. Hence to minimize the energetic cost of climbing, hikers should proceed directly up slopes no steeper than fifteen degrees, but should take switchbacks on steeper grades, keeping the climbing angle at fifteen degrees.

Minetti’s conclusion is borne out in a somewhat surprising and satisfying way: from data gleaned from topographic maps of trails connecting mountain towns, in mountain ranges from the Dolomites to the Himalaya. Sure enough, as I panted by the side of the trail in the Sierra Nevada, a Park Service sign informed me that the 1,100 foot climb to Twin Peaks would cover a mile, making an incline of about twelve degrees, near enough the optimum slope but emphatically not metabolically free.

It’s nice to know that, metabolically, there is a best way to climb higher. But I think there’s another practical implication of Margaria’s and Minetti’s work. If the best grade up is fifteen degrees, and the best grade down is only ten, the most efficient round trip can’t take you down the same way you came up. So you get two hikes every time you climb a slope. That rule notwithstanding, the Park Service would prefer that you stick to the path.




A three-inch-wide reef crab, straying near the entrance of a mantis shrimp's burrow, has made its last mistake. The mantis shrimp comes boiling out of its home, its colorful, paddle-like appendages signaling hostile intent. Two arms, adapted for hunting, are held folded, “chest” high, against its thorax. The mantis descends on the crab rapidly. After two movements—so fast as to be nearly imperceptible—accompanied by quite audible pops, there is a gaping hole in the thick shell of the crab. The mantis, itself six inches long, settles over the crustacean and with several more blows opens up the soft body of its prey.

The power of the strike is such that even a casual observer would sit up and take notice. How can such a small animal generate so much force in so little time? Biomechanists have recently discovered the surprising secret of the mantis shrimp: to destroy both prey and rivals, the animal relies on a clever spring and linkage mechanism that makes it the fastest “puncher” in the animal world.

Mantis shrimp, which comprise an order of crustaceans also known as stomatopods, inhabit near-shore waters all over the world. From the biomechanist's point of view there are two main kinds: the spearers, whose hunting appendages are tipped with spikes for impaling fish, and the smashers, whose appendages are rounded into a knoblike dactyl that can shatter thick snail shells. Smashers use their fearsome club to kill prey items and other stomatopods, and, in captivity, to break aquarium glass.

Recently Sheila N. Patek, Wyatt L. Korff, and Roy L. Caldwell, all zoologists at the University of California, Berkeley, set out to quantify just how fast a mantis shrimp can strike. Recording the motion with high-speed video cameras, they found the dactyl moves at more than fifty miles an hour. The peak acceleration is more than 10,400 times the acceleration of gravity. The fist of a boxer able to jab with such acceleration throughout his punch would be traveling at escape velocity from the Earth after just eleven-hundredths of a second!

Patek found that the mantis shrimp delivers its smashing blow with a hundred times more power than its own “arm” muscles can generate. To focus such explosive power the mantis shrimp cheats by slowly storing muscular energy with a spring and catch mechanism, then suddenly releasing the energy.

Catch mechanisms are responsible for the ability of some predatory fishes to rapidly open their mouths. But the spring of the mantis shrimp, a saddle-shaped piece of chitin that stores the muscular energy, is unique. The striking muscles squash together the ends of the saddle, causing it to rise up. When the catch is tripped, the saddle snaps back to its original shape, and the dactyl is propelled forward with devastating effect. The force of the spring is transmitted by what is essentially a long lever that connects the dactyl to the rest of the shrimp's arm; far from the fulcrum, the dactyl moves much faster than the spring does [see diagrams below].

mantis shrimp mechanics
Schematic diagram of the striking mechanism of the mantis shrimp comprises three bars of fixed length (one of which, bar AC, is stationary), a contracted muscle (AE) that acts like a fixed-length bar, and a spring, linked together as shown. (Note, however, that in reality the spring lies above the muscle.) The labeled points A through E in the diagrams correspond to the points marked on the drawing of the shrimp [see illustration at top of page]. In the cocked phase (above left) the spring is compressed. When the mechanism is released, the spring pushes against bar CD, causing point D to rotate counterclockwise around point C. Because of the rigidity of the bars, that rotation forces a slight clockwise rotation of bar AE about point A. The small, simultaneous movements of points D and E, which are both locked onto bar BE, translate into a large movement of point B—the business end of the mantis shrimp's striking mechanism—propelling it toward the shrimp's target with devastating effect (above right).
Roberto Osti
There is more at work here than just the action of saddle springs, though. When the dactyl strikes a target, distinctive bubbles form and collapse, a telltale sign that some of the devastation is caused by a phenomenon known as cavitation. Cavitation is the bane of the drive propellers on powerboats. When an object moves so fast through water that the pressure in its wake is lower than the vapor pressure of water, the water near the object, in effect, boils, and minuscule bubbles of water vapor form around the moving object. When the surrounding water returns to its normal, higher pressure, the bubbles collapse with such force that they cause pitting on surfaces as hard as stainless steel.

Cavitation is explained by Laplace's law, which will be empirically familiar to anyone who has ever blown up a balloon. Laplace's law states that the pressure inside a bubble is proportional to the tension in the wall of the bubble divided by the bubble's radius. Thus the smaller the radius, the higher the vapor pressure inside. Remember how hard it is to get that first puff of air into the balloon? The radius is small and so the pressure must be high to swell the balloon. As the balloon inflates, though, the pressure needed to expand it further decreases dramatically.

The cavitation bubbles formed during the strike of the dactyl range in size from a quarter of an inch to just a few hundredths of an inch in radius, and the pressure inside can be thousands of pounds per square inch. As the bubbles wander from the low-pressure region where they formed, higher pressures compress them; their decreasing volume drives the pressure inside the bubble, as well as the temperature of the water vapor, higher still. Such hot, high-pressure water can cause a lot of damage.

The bubbles form between the mantis shrimp's dactyl and the shell of its prey, so cavitation may play an important role in destroying hard targets. It also poses a problem for the mantis shrimp. The dactyl itself becomes pitted and scuffed, even on parts of its surface unlikely to have hit the prey directly. The cavitation bubbles may be causing the damage.

Whatever the source of the damage, the stomatopod compensates for it by shedding its hard outer skeleton periodically. Vulnerable but still feisty, the mantis shrimp continues to rush from its burrow when provoked, even though it's not much of a threat. But as the exoskeleton hardens, the animal once more becomes the peerless puncher of the sea, and probably the miniweight champion of the world.



The humpback whale, that mighty leviathan of the briny deep, hardly strikes one as a marvel of agility; on the contrary, it seems the very embodiment of stateliness and power. Each the size of a school bus, these awesome mammals cruise, mouths agape, so as to gather the tons of biomass they need to sate their appetites every day.

But the humpback gives the lie to the notion that things of great bulk move only by lumbering. After all, who hasn’t seen, at least on film, the spectacle of a huge whale’s great breach, its breathtaking leap from the water followed by a great returning splash? And underwater, the animals move with such astonishing agility that they’ve caught the attention of naval engineers, who hope that some of the principles learned from the study of the humpback’s flippers can be applied to designing submersible vehicles of unprecedented maneuverability.

Megaptera novaeangliae, the humpback’s scientific name, means “big-winged New Englander”—a nod to the pods of humpies living near the Stellwagen Banks of Massachusetts Bay, as well as to their very long flippers. Humpbacks, like other baleen whales, eat large amounts of small prey. But instead of simply swimming through aggregations of prey, as many of their cousins do, humpbacks often make “bubble nets”—narrow, cylindrical walls of bubbles—by exhaling while they swim in circles beneath their prey. The bubble nets concentrate the prey, and so, when a whale then swims through the center of a bubble net, its payoff is a rich mouthful.

Bubble nets vary in size, depending on the kind of prey the whales are pursuing. When a humpback is corralling herring and other fishes, the net may be 150 feet wide. But when the humpbacks are rounding up krill—small, shrimpy crustaceans—the net may be as small as five feet across. That behavior raises an intriguing question: How can a thirty-five-foot-long animal swim in such tight circles?

The question has long fascinated the aptly named Frank E. Fish, a biomechanist at West Chester University of Pennsylvania. Fish thought the secret to the humpback’s tight turning radius might be its flippers. The humpback has the longest flippers of any whale, and they lie substantially forward of the whale’s center of mass, well placed to exert turning forces on the whale. In fact, the two flippers look quite a bit like wings: each is between nine and twelve feet long, about four times longer than its width, and each has a rounded leading edge and a thin trailing edge. Most intriguing, each flipper also has large bumps, called tubercles, that jut out from its leading edge, giving the flipper a serrated appearance.

Over the years, biologists have suggested a number of possible functions for the humpback’s flippers. Some have seen them as large heat exchangers, or prey attractors, or devices for making sound when slapped against the water. Some have seen them as hydrofoils—water wings—that help the whale make its turns. Oddly, the tubercles have not led to the same level of speculation.

Working with three engineers—David S. Miklosovic and Mark M. Murray, both at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland, and Laurens E. Howle of Duke University in Durham, North Carolina—Fish set out to test his hypothesis that the tubercles help the flipper hydrodynamically. For their work, the four investigators relied on two scaled-down plastic replicas of a humpback flipper, twenty-two inches long. One replica featured prominent tubercles; the other had the same area and cross section, but a smooth leading edge. Both models were then tested in a wind tunnel.

A wind tunnel might not seem to be the environment of choice for testing a flipper that functions in water. Fortunately, though, results obtained with airfoils in moving air can be “translated” into findings that pertain to flippers moving in water. The key to the translation is known as the Reynolds number, a kind of scaling factor that combines three sets of numbers to summarize how an object interacts with a surrounding fluid. In this case, the sets of numbers relevant to the Reynolds number are the length and width of the wing, the density and viscosity of the surrounding fluid, and the speed at which fluid and fin slide past each other.

As long as the Reynolds number is held constant, a one-hundredth scale model of an airplane wing will act just like its full-scale version—and a scale model of a flipper in a wind tunnel can become a stand-in for the real thing in the ocean. That remarkable property is a huge convenience for engineers and biomechanists, making it possible to study objects moving at practical speeds simply by varying the viscosity of the surrounding fluid. In this case, Miklosovic and Murray kept the Reynolds number for their scale models appropriate to conditions in nature by running the air past the models faster than the whales would move in seawater. Yet they were still able to get a good idea of the effect of having bumps on the leading edge.

wing
Fluid—whether liquid or gaseous—passing over a wing (blue arrows) creates lift (upward-pointing arrow). But what distinguishes the humpback’s flipper from an ordinary wing is the presence of tubercles, or bumps, on the flipper’s leading edge (above left). The tubercles enable the flipper to create lift at angles as steep as roughly seventeen degrees, because the water gets accelerated into an organized, rotating flow behind the troughs formed by the tubercles. A flipper with a smooth leading edge (above right) would stall, or cease to provide lift, at such an angle, because the water would be spun into a disorganized series of eddies.
Patricia J. Wynne
The body of a whale is relatively stiff, and so the animal cannot curve sinuously into a turn the way a swimming seal can. To propel itself around a corner, a whale instead relies on the lift generated by its flippers. Fish and his colleagues found that the tubercles enable a flipper to continue generating lift at angles of attack 40 percent steeper than are possible with a smooth wing [see illustration above]. In other words, when a humpback turns, it can roll farther onto its side without losing its “grip” on the water, and so make a sharper turn, because of the tubercles.
But the tubercles would seem to solve one problem only to introduce another. Protruding into the flow as they do, they would appear to increase the drag of the flipper as the whale swings into a turn. Appearances can be deceiving, though—particularly where drag is concerned. When the scalloped flipper is held nearly horizontal in the flow, the drag is no different from that of a smooth flipper, and at high angles of attack the drag is actually lower. So, just when the whale is using its flipper to turn the tightest, the flipper slides through water more easily than it would if it had a smooth leading edge, even as it generates far more lift than a smooth flipper could.

With their stiff bodies, whales are far better analogues for man-made submersibles than more sinuous aquatic animals are. Fish and his colleagues hope to design guidance fins for underwater vehicles that can give them some of the agility that enables a thirty-ton animal to turn on a dime—or at least a large doormat.


Hummingbirds, those common visitors to bird feeders and honeysuckle vines, seem adapted for one primary task: gathering nectar from flowers. Consider the apparent singularity of purpose with which these animals are shaped. Their wing bones are fused into a stiff paddle that enables them to hover at a bloom while drinking. Their tongues are long and specially shaped to hold an abundance of the sugary liquid on which they feed.

Their beaks, though, represent a truly brilliant fit between form and function. Hummingbirds with long bills feed on deep flowers, while those with shorter bills head for smaller blooms. Even the degree of bill curvature of any particular hummingbird species matches the arc of the birds’ preferred floral food source. But all is not sweet water and bliss, for the hummingbird’s beak must perform another task that seems opposed to nectar gathering—catching insects on the fly.

Nectar is the avian equivalent of Coca-Cola—it’s not much more than sugar and water. In the course of a day a hummer drinks more than its body weight in nectar, and the bird burns through the solution—which is 20 to 50 percent sugar by weight—at a furious pace. But as parents point out to their kids, you can’t live on sugar alone, and that fact is as true for hummingbirds as it is for people. The birds must supplement their carbohydrate-rich diet with daily helpings of insects to get necessary fats and amino acids that are scarce or even nonexistent in nectar.

Birds have two strategies for snagging insects on the wing. Some species with large mouths and small bills, such as nighthawks, whip-poorwills, and the aptly named frogmouth owls, open their bills wide as they fly into insects, and the prey is captured in the birds’ gaping maws. In contrast, narrow-billed birds such as flycatchers rely on their bills to catch flying prey; some flycatchers are so specialized that they maneuver the tips of their bills like forceps, pinching insects out of the air.

The hummingbird might seem best suited to the forceps approach, though a bird with such a long bill might have a hard time snapping both quickly and precisely on an evasive gnat. Gregor M. Yanega and Margaret A. Rubega, both biologists at the University of Connecticut in Storrs, have discovered that not only do hummers act more like nighthawks than like flycatchers, they also manage to widen their needlelike bill to better snag their prey.

To see how hummingbirds catch insects, Yanega and Rubega ran a video camera at 500 frames a second to film individuals of several species in slow motion as they fed on fruit flies. Projected at far slower rates, the movies reveal that a hummingbird catches flies at the base of its bill rather than at the tip. Most surprising, as the bird opens its beak to catch a fly, the lower bill suddenly bends downward at a point near the middle and widens, enlarging the bird’s mouth to the detriment of the fly.

The upper and lower parts of a bird’s beak correspond to the upper and lower jaws in people. The bones of both parts of the beak are covered with a structure known as a rhamphotheca, a sheath made of keratin, the same stuff your fingernails are made of. Unlike most vertebrates, many birds have a joint in the upper jaw, behind the beak, that enables the upper beak to bend toward the head as it opens. Some bird species also have a joint in the lower jaw, but in most species the lower bill is inflexible: it opens by rotating at the jaw joint, just like your mandible, and, also like your mandible, it does not bend in the middle. Careful examination of hummingbird skeletons shows that they belong to the latter, mainstream crowd.

How, then, does a hummingbird manage to expand its lower bill when hunting insects? Despite decades of study, specialists were still surprised when they took a close look at this part of the hummingbird’s anatomy. It turns out that the bone of the lower beak both twists and bends like a strip of thin plastic when the lower bill opens far enough. Bones that bend? No wonder the anatomists missed that one. But bendy bones, though rare, are not unheard of. For example, the bones in a bat’s wing bend, and so do the tongue bones of woodpeckers.

You can get a feel for the remarkable bending action of the hummingbird’s lower bill by cutting a narrow strip from the long dimension of a piece of typing paper, making a rectangle one inch by eleven inches long. Fold the strip in half along the short axis, leaving a V whose two legs are each one inch by five-and-a-half inches long. Hold an end between the thumb and forefinger of each hand, with the vertex of the V pointing away from you [see illustration]. Touch your thumb knuckles together while keeping your palms parallel to the ground. The paper “bill” should now be pointed straight out in front of you, ready to open wide. Rotate your palms together and you will see that the sides of the bill spread apart while the far end rotates downward, about an axis roughly midway between your thumbs and the tip of the V. Like the narrow paper bill, the real hummingbird’s lower bill splays apart into a shape that is far better—though certainly not ideal—for catching insects.

The beak of any bird, even of a dietary specialist such as a hummingbird, serves multiple functions. Potential conflicts, such as the simultaneous need for a long, narrow bill to fit flowers and a broad bill to catch insects, often give rise to the most interesting cases of natural selection in action. The hummer resolves the conflict by devoting the shape of its bill to one purpose and its material properties to the other.




Now is a lovely time of year to head down to the beach. But forgo the warm sand in favor of the more interesting rocky headland down the shore. Then, as the waves pound in, consider what it must be like to live here.

At low tide, the sun beats down and heats what little water remains in scattered pools, where oxygen levels madly fluctuate and salinity increases with each evaporative minute. When the tides change, the physiological insults ease, only to be replaced by the physical battering of the waves, which try alternately to shove things higher onto the shore and to suck them into the deep. The habitat might as well be called intertidal hell.

Yet organisms from anemones to zooxanthellae are perfectly happy here. How surf-zone denizens manage to survive the wave-swept environment could fill entire books on biomechanics. But the story of one alga’s fight to hang on caught my attention.

Moving water exerts drag; no doubt you’ve felt it—the force that knocks you off your feet as you stand in the surf. It’s the same force that scours rocks on the seashore clean of encrusting critters. In this context the drag on an organism changes with three factors: the speed of the water and the shape and the size of the organism itself. Faster water exerts a lot more force; in fact, drag varies directly with the square of velocity, so, for instance, doubling the water velocity bumps up drag fourfold. Size, or more properly cross-sectional area, also matters because the bulkier an object, the more rushing water slams into it. (A kayak pinned broadside to the current against a submerged rock is much harder to move than a kayak lodged against the rock head-on.) The way shape influences drag force is captured by the drag coefficient, a term automakers invoke so often that you might think it applies only to cars.

Creatures trying to make a living in the surf zone deal with the push and pull of waves by manipulating all three of these determinants of drag in their efforts to stay in the same general spot. Many animals hide in crevices or in the lee of a rock, where flow speeds are lower. Others take an engineer’s approach to the problem: they assume the minimum size that will enclose their feeding and reproductive organs—and never budge in size or position. Thus barnacles, limpets, and chitons that fall into the fixed-shape category are stuck with the same shape all the time.

Other creatures, however, have opted for more flexibility. Two biologists, Michael L. Boller at Stanford University’s Hopkins Marine Station in Pacific Grove and Emily Carrington at the University of Washington’s Friday Harbor Labs on San Juan Island, are looking at how algae manage to stay attached to their rocky homes despite battering waves. Algae can’t take the fixed-shape path, at least not without sacrificing an awful lot of area needed for photosynthesis. They can’t trot off to the far side of the rock, either, to hide from the incoming waves. The solution, at least for some macroalgae, appears to involve tricky contortionism; they co-opt the force of the water to produce changes in their own shape that simultaneously reduce their area and their coefficient of drag.

Boller and Carrington worked with a common alga of New England and European surf zones, Irish moss (Chondrus crispus). Though called a red alga, Irish moss can range from dark purple to yellowish green, and it is shaped like a miniature tree about eight inches high [see illustrations below]. (It is also a source of carrageenan, a thickener used in ice cream—and anything to do with ice cream is relevant to my kind of biomechanics.) They collected Irish moss samples of various size and shape, and glued their bases—appropriately called holdfasts—to a platform that could measure drag force. Then they submerged the platform in a flume, the aquatic equivalent of a treadmill, and measured the drag force as they changed the flow speed from a gentle lapping to a punishing postgale surge. As the flow speed increased, the algae morphed into lower-drag shapes.

In still water the algae stood tall and bushy, with lots of area for the sun to stimulate the chloroplasts. In moving water the algae took two different positions, depending on the strength of the flow. In languid washes, each stipe—an algal analog to the trunk of a tree—bent over, so the algae’s foliage brushed the bottom of the flume. The change decreased the area presented to the flow and reshaped the algae from upright tree to pointed cone. At that stage, because drag forces were relatively low and the algae’s canopies were still largely exposed, it’s likely a good deal of photosynthesis could still take place.

At faster flows, the algae morphed even more. As the flow speed rose, the canopies of the Irish moss became increasingly compact—each narrowing into a cone with an area less than half of its shape in still water. Furthermore, the shape changes enabled the algae to hide their canopies in their own flow shadows and thereby slightly lower the drag coefficient. No question, the drag force on the algae increased with the speed of the flow, but not as fast as it would have without the change in shape. Above a certain velocity, however, the algae reach a point where they cannot get any smaller. Carrington and Boller aren’t sure how much the final, squeezed shape affects photosynthesis; prolonged exposure to fast water can’t be good, but the organism can certainly weather the occasional storm.

No amount of reconfiguration on the part of the Irish moss can keep up with a force change that depends on the square of water velocity—the drag continues to increase with water speed until the current finally washes the algae away. But by allowing the stipe and canopy to go with the flow, the holdfast is usually saved from being ripped from the rock. It brings to mind blustery days I’ve spent at the rocky shore. Considering my size, my area, and my high drag coefficient I would have done better positioning my posterior to the wind, and taken shelter in my own not inconsiderable bulk.



Although plants are firmly rooted in the ground, they do move: sunflowers track the Sun across the sky; daffodils turn their floral faces away from the wind as it blows. Most plant motion is either quite slow (the sunflower), or driven by external factors (the wind on the daffodil). Herbal hustle caused by internal forces is uncommon. That’s no surprise, really: plants have neither nerves nor muscles, nor do they have other obvious mechanisms for generating force rapidly.

Yet despite the lack of muscle, several plant lineages have independently evolved some capacity for rapid movement. The trigger plants of Australia, for instance, slap a dab of pollen on visiting bees. More morbidly, the Venus flytrap slams two halves of a leaf shut on nutritious insects. Recently, investigators discovered that the flytrap owes its quick grasp to a “bistable configuration” of its leaves, whereby small movements can trigger much larger ones.

The Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula) is native to verdant, boggy coastal plains of North and South Carolina. Bogs are more acidic and have fewer nutrients than most plants can tolerate, and so it’s no coincidence that several bog plants supplement their root-gathered nutrition with insect snacks. That makes a bog into a minefield for winged and walking arthropods. Bladderworts, pitcher plants, and sundews all indulge their carnivorous tastes. Among those refugees from the Little Shop of Insect Horrors, though, the flytrap has a uniquely dynamic method for catching prey.

The flytrap features a set of inch-long, heart-shaped capture leaves, each fringed with trigger hairs and bisected by a deep fold. Any insect unwary enough to bend a single hair is a goner. The two halves of the leaf snap shut along its fold in just 100 milliseconds, swiftly enveloping the animal. The trigger hairs become the bars of a prison. In the ensuing few hours the trap seals itself airtight, and digestive glands in the leaf secrete enzymes that reduce the insect to a dry husk.

Botanists discovered the Venus flytrap several hundred years ago, and its behavior has fascinated people ever since. It may come as a surprise, then, that until recently no one knew how a flytrap, unthinking and without muscles, could move fast enough to capture flies. The mystery prompted Yoël Forterre, a physicist at the University of Provence in Marseille, France, and his colleagues to take up the case.

To improve visibility, the team began by daubing flytrap leaves with dots of paint that glows under ultraviolet light. Then they shot videos of the leaves closing, at 400 frames per second (a somewhat smaller video file, showing the action at 125 frames per second is available online at www.nature.com/nature/journal/v433/n7024/suppinfo/nature03185.html). Watching the videos in slow motion, and tracing the path of each painted dot in three dimensions, the investigators discovered that what appears to be a quick, fluid snap of the two halves of the leaf is actually a three-phase process.

In its initial, open configuration, the capture leaf looks like a paperback book that has been splayed open by breaking its binding, and further insulted by bending its spine into an arc. The two halves of the leaf also curve away from each other; if you were to see them from the hapless insect’s point of view, they would appear to be convex, with the center of each leaf toward you and the edges curving away.
The first phase of the leaf closure begins when a trigger hair is disturbed. The capture leaf begins to close slowly for half a second or more, reducing the “gape” of the leaf by a few hundredths of an inch. As it does so, the spine straightens slightly, its curvature resisting the closure like a spring. The leaf halves retain their convex curvature even as they rotate slightly toward each other.

Suddenly the leaf crosses a critical threshold, and the second phase begins. The two halves buckle outward, into a new, concave configuration (again, from the insect’s point of view), and the leaves snap shut.

During the third phase the leaf slowly continues to close. That process can last a long time; the trap keeps closing for hours and remains closed for days.

Because both the open, convex configuration and the closed, concave one resist any rotation of the leaf halves about the spine, both configurations are stable. The leaf is therefore bistable.

To get a better picture of the idea, think about the shape of a toilet plunger, or plumber’s helper. Stored next to the toilet, a plunger is in a stable, concave configuration. When you use it on a clogged toilet, as long as you don’t push too hard, the plunger is stable enough to spring back to its resting state. Push too hard, though, and the rim of the plunger will snap back along the handle, and the whole thing will buckle into a convex shape [see illustration below]. Then, unfortunately, you must flip it back by hand. Much the same effect drives the sudden closure of the flytrap. The closing pushes the structure to the edge of stability slowly enough that the hapless insect never notices. Then suddenly, in becomes out, out becomes in, and the prey is neatly trapped.

Earlier botanists had proposed that the flytrap, lacking muscles, relied on cellular water pumps called vacuoles to drive the leaf closure. That hypothesis had been met with some skepticism, because the change in leaf shape seemed to require that a large volume of fluid move rapidly from one place to another. Water-powered movement can drive slow motions, such as that of a sunflower tracking the Sun. But no one could see how cells could gain volume fast enough to close the flytrap.

Forterre and his colleagues, however, have demonstrated that fast pumping isn’t needed. Just a small change in the shape of the leaf cells—which needn’t be powered by a flow rate any higher than that of the water in and out of sunflower cells—can cause the trap to snap quickly. Pushed to the point of instability, the leaf halves are forced to buckle into a new shape. The continuing slow rotation of the leaf halves in the third phase is also consistent with a slow flow rate of water into the leaf cells.

The pretty yet creepy Venus flytrap illustrates a principle applicable to a variety of self-assembling structures. Take my self-erecting shelter for the beach. In its storage configuration it looks like several flat discs of nylon fabric. But when I grab one layer and shake it, the fiberglass supports suddenly reconfigure, and a two-person hut stands ready for use. The Venus flytrap makes me wonder how hard it would be to add low-force actuators to my sunshade—for rapid repacking or, with an unsuspecting person sitting inside, simply for entertainment.




Blood is amazingly delicate and unstable. Essentially a suspension of cells and proteins in water, blood forms clots or clumps in response to any harsh mechanical treatment. That property keeps blood from pouring out uncontrollably after a break in a blood vessel, but it has also made it impossible so far to devise an artificial device that can pump blood without degrading its components and thereby increasing the risk of stroke.

The human heart is so miraculously gentle that it avoids that pitfall. Even as it contracts a hundred thousand times a day, pushing blood through a network of piping that is astonishingly complex, it keeps clotting to a minimum—in part because of its shape. What has been a mystery is how the heart achieves its shape, because its form doesn't seem to be entirely the responsibility of the genes that are active as the organ develops. Biomechanists studying the hearts of embryonic zebra fish have discovered that what shapes the heart, in part, are the forces of blood flow—the very same forces that, in other circumstances, turn blood into clotted goo.

heart valves
Cutaway ventral (“front”) views (not to scale) of three vertebrate hearts—human (left), bird (center), and amphibian—demonstrate the variety of shapes that the organ can assume. In the human and the bird hearts, the right side (the nomenclature reflects the heart owner's point of view) sends blood (blue) to the lungs to be oxygenated; on returning to the heart, the oxygenated blood (red) is then pumped to the rest of the body. Amphibian hearts have a three-chambered structure; although deoxygenated blood enters on the right of the heart and oxygenated blood enters on its left, the two flows are united (purple) in a Y-shaped structure called the conus arteriosus before they branch toward the lungs (and skin) or the rest of the body.
Tom Moore
Fish are half-hearted when it comes to blood flow, at least compared with mammals. The mammalian heart is actually two conjoined pumps: one sends blood to the lungs, to be oxygenated; the other supplies blood to the tissues of the body. A fish's heart, however, has a single pump that pushes blood into a bed of capillaries in the gills, before circulating it at low pressures throughout the rest of the body. In spite of such a major organizational difference, the early development of fish and human hearts is similar, and both kinds of heart have a similarly gentle effect on the fluid they pump.

The zebra fish, a common denizen of home aquariums, has become a favorite subject of study by developmental biologists because its embryonic stage is transparent and a good size for microscopy, two attributes that make its organ systems easy to observe as they form. If you watch closely, you can see the heart of a zebra fish embryo beating rhythmically within a day of fertilization. That heartbeat has been a long-standing puzzle: Why does it begin so early, far sooner than seems necessary? At that stage, the embryo is still so small that diffusion alone could readily supply oxygen and nutrients to its tissues. Yet, there is the tiny heart, busily working away, pushing blood through a rudimentary circulatory system.

Jay R. Hove, a physiologist now at the University of Cincinnati, and Reinhard W. Köster, now a biologist at the the Institute of Developmental Genetics in Munich, and colleagues at Caltech have presented convincing evidence that the paradoxically early appearance of the fish's heart enables fluid forces to shape the young pump into a gentle giant. Earlier investigations had already demonstrated that cardiac endothelial cells, primordial cells that control the development of the heart, change shape when subjected to shear forces—just the kind of forces a fluid exerts when it flows past a fixed object. Hove and Köster have shown experimentally that the shear forces of flowing blood in the developing heart are strong enough to reshape the heart as it matures.

Measuring fluid forces in the heart of an embryonic zebra fish a day and a half after fertilization is no mean feat. After all, the entire embryo could fit on the head of a pin, and the heart is far thinner than a human hair. No probe available is small enough to measure flow directly in something that size. The investigators had to rely instead on clever but indirect techniques.

The heart of the embryonic zebra fish first appears as a clear, straight tube, except for two regions of swelling along its length [see diagrams at right]. The two swellings contract in sequence, just as they do once they fully differentiate into the atrium, which receives blood from the body, and the ventricle, which pushes the fluid pumped into it from the atrium back out. Hove, Köster, and their colleagues estimated the amount of blood pumped with each stroke by measuring the initial and final volume of the ventricle, the larger of the two chambers of the heart. To make the measurement, they highlighted the blood of a number of zebra fish with a glowing green dye, then filmed the heart as it fully contracted and expanded.

zebrafish heart
Zebra fish heart thirty-seven hours into development (a) is essentially a tube with two bulges, the atrium and the ventricle, that pump blood through the circulatory system. After four and a half days (b) the heart bends so that the atrium lies next to the ventricle, another contractile chamber called the bulbus arteriosis forms, and valves develop between chambers to prevent reverse movement of blood. Surgically inserted glass beads, either at the entrance to the atrium (c) or the exit from the ventricle (e), prevent normal development of the heart: the heart does not bend, neither the bulbus arteriosis nor the valves form, and the ventricle fuses shut (d, f).
Tom Moore
From the volume of blood pumped and the duration of a single heartbeat, the team calculated the speed of the blood as it flowed through the heart. And once they had the fluid speed, they could determine the shear stress in the heart wall. The forces they calculated might seem small, but in a fish just thirty-seven hours old, the forces are strong enough to change which genes are turned on or off in endothelial cells, thereby reshaping the cells. Perhaps the shear forces trigger the cell membrane to release proteins that affect gene expression.

A different technique showed that even greater shear forces can develop in older embryos. By four and a half days after fertilization, a zebra fish has grown to about an eighth of an inch long, and its heart has become as wide as a human hair. The heart is bent in such a way that the atrium and the ventricle lie next to each other, and valves to prevent blood from flowing backwards are already recognizable. Again the investigators filmed dark blood cells as they swirled in bright green-dyed plasma through the heart, then tracked the filmed positions of the cells frame-by-frame with the help of a computer. On the basis of that analysis they built a computer-based model of the blood flow, which showed that a high-speed jet of blood passes from atrium to ventricle with each beat, creating vortexes in the blood. The shear forces exerted by the vortexes are strong enough to rearrange the cytoskeleton of an endothelial cell, and thus to change the cell's shape.

The biomechanists hadn't proved that blood flow, rather than blood pressure, is the most important factor in heart development. To make sure, the workers implanted a microscopic spherical bead, either at the entrance or the exit of each heart: a bead that blocks the entrance reduces both blood flow and pressure in the heart, whereas one that blocks the exit reduces just the flow, not the pressure. After only twenty hours the results were clear. With either blockage the heart failed to develop normally: the valves did not form, the atrium and ventricle did not lie next to each other, and a contractile third chamber that appears in the normal heart never developed. Shear force is the major player in shaping the developing heart.

The heart works, in fact, largely because it is flexible. The genome does not code for a pump of specific shape, but rather for a cell type that can respond to shear, the force that damages blood cells. Those cells ensure that as the heart develops, it grows in ways that minimize shear. The end result is a pump gentle enough to circulate blood without causing dangerous clots.



Follow the southwestern coast of Africa north from Cape of Good Hope toward Namibia's gemstone-rich Skeleton Coast, and you come to the Namib Desert. Home to the world's highest sand dunes, the Namib is also a cornucopia of biomechanical marvels: a spider that rolls like a wheel; a gecko that dances on the hot sand; and the bizarre, two-leafed Welwitschia mirabilis, which looks like a wrecked airplane planted in the sand and can live more than a thousand years.  The environment is a harsh one. Annual rainfall in the Namib typically measures less than an inch, and on most days the only source of moisture is the early morning fog that rolls off the chilly Atlantic, tantalizing the denizens of the parched sands.

In the slaty light of one such foggy dawn, a long-legged Namib beetle (genus Stenocara) stands on a small ridge of sand. Its head faces upwind, and its stiff, bumpy outer wings are spread against the damp breeze. Minute water droplets from the fog gather on its wings; there the droplets coalesce, until they finally grow big enough to release their electrostatic grip on the wing surfaces and roll down to the beetle’s mouth parts, giving the animal an early morning drink. In such an arid environment that drink is vital, for once the Sun burns off the fog, there is little the insect can soak up except blistering heat. Besides being helpful to the beetle, the water-gathering mechanism—only recently understood by investigators—might someday become the basis for large-scale, artificial schemes to gather water from the air.

There's plenty of water in a fog bank; the hard part is getting hold of it. The water droplets in fog are, on average, just one one-thousandth of an inch across, and the largest ones are only twice that size. The droplets are so small, in fact, that they often don't fall downward; instead they get carried sideways or even upward by currents of wind.

The trick to drinking fog is getting the droplets to aggregate, so that wind and electrostatic forces no longer overwhelm gravity. When a wind-blown fog droplet lands on a hydrophilic (water-loving) surface, such as clean glass or stone, the drop flattens out because of the electrostatic attraction between the molecules of water and those of the surface. The cross section of the flat drop is too small for the wind to pick it back up. And, because water molecules so strongly attract each other, the flat drop also presents a highly hydrophilic surface to which other droplets can attach.

Andrew R. Parker, a zoologist at the University of Oxford, and Chris R. Lawrence, an investigator at the defense research firm QinetiQ, headquartered in Farnborough, England, discovered that Stenocara beetles take advantage of those basic properties of water. On the beetle’s elytra—its hardened, outer pair of wings—there is a pattern that alternates hydrophilic bumps, just one-fiftieth of an inch across, with waxy, hydrophobic (water-averse) valleys. A fog droplet collects on each little bump, and further droplets attach to the first. The droplets coalesce and grow until they reach about two-tenths of an inch in diameter. At that size, because the insect’s back slopes at roughly forty-five degrees to the horizontal, the drops are heavy enough to unstick from the bumps and buck the wind. Each drop slides down the wings toward the beetle’s mouth like a bead of rain on the hood of a freshly waxed car.

It’s a neat trick, but it hardly seems practical to have teeming hoards of beetles harvesting fog for water. What would you do with them for the fogless rest of the day? And how would you keep them from drinking the water themselves, rather than donating it to crops, livestock, or people? Fortunately, Parker and Lawrence have a solution. They developed a surface to mimic the beetle’s elytra that seems to work as well as the beetle’s wings do. The two investigators partly embedded dozens of glass spheres, each about the diameter of a poppy seed, in a thin layer of wax. After de-waxing the top of each glass sphere with alcohol, they had an array of hydrophilic bumps in a hydrophobic field. In tests, they found that neatly ordered arrays of beads caught more mist than random, disordered ones did. But both kinds of array caught more than did smooth, waxy surfaces; most water drops just bounced off the latter. Water landing on bare glass drained in unpredictable directions.

Many techniques that imitate nature—collectively known as biomimetic technologies—are prohibitively expensive. This one might well be a commercially viable exception. There are a number of ways to create either flexible or rigid surfaces with hydrophilic-hydrophobic patterns. Perhaps the simplest would be to print hydrophilic dots onto sheets of such hydrophobic materials as polyethylene. On a camping tent, for instance, such a printed pattern, combined with suitable guttering, could gather the day’s water supply from the early morning mist.

Parker and Lawrence’s effort isn’t the first time people have tried to harvest water from fog. People in remote areas of South America have already relied on fog for their water. According to the government of Canada (which collaborated, with an organization called FogQuest, on a plan to develop technologies to harvest fog), collectors near the village of Chungungo, Chile, gathered an average of 4,000 gallons of fog-borne water a day for several years in the past decade. The fog would collect on the threads of fine nets before it dripped into gutters leading to cisterns.

In other, windier areas, droplets could blow through the nets or get blown off again after landing. Parker and Lawrence’s work shows that those drawbacks could be minimized by substituting solid panels for the nets. I even hold out the hope that solid panels could become so efficient that they could act as highly localized fog busters. For those of us who are routinely delayed as we pass through such perennially fogbound airports as San Francisco’s, fog-busting itself might be the technology’s “killer app.” But my biggest hope for this discovery is that it will spur new efforts to preserve biodiversity. After all, you never know where you’ll find your next drink.



Squids and octopuses are well known for their jet-propelled locomotion, scooting along by squirting water out of their mantles. But bivalves? Not many people have seen the ungainly, clapping flight of the scallop, but its motion is likewise jet-propelled.

The scallop is one of only a few bivalve mollusks—invertebrates with a two-part shell—that can truly swim. When threatened, the scallop claps the two halves of its shell together, and thus expels a jet of water that propels it to safety. By repeatedly slamming the shell, the scallop manages to wobble unsteadily through the water.

Simple enough, right? Yet it probably won't surprise regular readers of this column that basic research on the locomotion of scallops has implications for scientific investigations of seemingly unrelated matters. It turns out that studying the swimming of cold-water scallops can guide applied research on manipulating polymers at various temperatures.

Like clams and mussels, scallops have two half shells, or “valves,” attached to each other by a strong hinge. A large (and tasty) muscle, the adductor, is attached to the center of each valve, and when the muscle contracts, the shell closes to protect the animal's soft parts. The muscle can exert force only to close the shell; to open, the shell relies entirely on a little rubbery pad of protein just inside the hinge. The rubbery pad gets squashed when the shell closes, but as the closing muscle relaxes, the pad rebounds and pushes the shell back open. That's why when you're shopping for live bivalves for dinner, you want the closed ones: they are manifestly alive because they're still holding their shells tightly shut.

The jetting mechanism in a scallop works like a somewhat inefficient two-cycle engine. When the adductor muscle closes the shell, water squirts out; when the adductor relaxes, the rubbery pad pops the shell back open, allowing water back inside and replenishing the jet [see illustration below]. The cycles repeat until the scallop is out of predator range or closer to a better food supply. Unfortunately, the jet-power phase is delivered for only a short part of the cycle. Scallops, however, have adapted to make the most of what power and thrust they can produce.

One of their tricks is to lighten the load by having thin shells, whose weakness is offset by corrugations. Another adaptation—the key, in fact, to their culinary charm—is that large, tasty adductor muscle, physiologically suited to the powerful cycles of contraction and relaxation in jetting. Finally, that little rubbery pad is made of a natural elastic called abductin, which does an excellent job of returning the energy put into it by shell closure.

As inefficient as jetting is for all scallops, the cold-water species face even tougher challenges. For one thing, the power output of muscles decreases in the cold. For another, cold water is more viscous, and offers more resistance. And finally, in the Antarctic, where the water temperature is only twenty-eight degrees Fahrenheit, the rubbery abductin should become less elastic. Those factors explain why the Antarctic scallop, Adamussium colbecki, is just barely able to sustain level motion.

Yet despite the cold, A. colbecki manages to swim. Mark W. Denny and Luke P. Miller, biomechanists at Stanford's Hopkins Marine Station in Pacific Grove, California, traveled all the way south to McMurdo Sound to figure out how. Their initial findings were not unexpected: in A. colbecki the shell contributes less to the animal's total weight than it does in tropical scallop species, giving its adductor muscle less shell to swing shut with each jet cycle.

Denny and Miller's next set of measurements, however, is harder to understand. Instead of an extra-large muscle to compensate for the cold, they found that A. colbecki has a closing adductor half as big as the adductor in a warm-water bivalve of similar size. Although that, too, saves weight, the shift in proportions implies that closing the shell takes less force but more time—not to mention that it takes more cold-water scallops to make a satisfying entrée. In fact, the combination of low shell mass and low muscle mass translates into a severe handicap for the scallop—a ratio of jetting power to animal mass that is only 20 percent that of the warm-water scallop's. Those numbers explain why cold-water scallops are just barely able to jet.

Of course, Denny and Miller were on the lookout for some evolutionary advantage to make up for the skimpy musculature. What they found was something new about the properties of polymers.

In severe cold, the abductin in the scallop's hinge should become less able to store energy. After all, as many readers may recall, the catastrophic explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in 1986 was caused by cold weather, which made the booster-rocket O-rings so hard and brittle that they allowed hot gases to escape. When Denny and Miller checked the effect of changing temperature on the Antarctic scallop's abductin, they did indeed find a decrease in bounce with a drop in temperature, but it was a smaller decrease than occurs in temperate-zone mollusks. Natural selection has thus fine-tuned the response of abductin to temperature.

The difference is small potatoes for the scallop; the energy returned by Antarctic abductin is only a small fraction of the total needed to jet. But a rubber that retains its bounce in the cold would make materials scientists take notice.

The scallop won't readily give up its secret, however. The composition of warm- and cold-water abductins is basically the same; the differences must lie in the arrangement of the protein polymers that store and release energy. Identifying those minute differences will further confirm the rule of thumb that blue-sky (or in this case blue-water) research has unanticipated implications far outside the shell of the original work.



ON FIELDS OF DREAMS, the duel between the batter and the pitcher at times assumes aspects of humiliation and farce. And never more so than when a batter misses a pitch, swinging so forcefully as to nearly sprain something. The culprit in such cases is usually either a rising fastball or a so-called drop curveball.

From the batter’s perspective, a rising fastball follows a normal trajectory until it is quite close to home plate, at which point it seems to jump several inches, as if lifted by some mysterious force. A drop curveball, on the other hand, appears to drop straight down right in front of the plate, from twelve o’clock to six o’clock—hence its other name, “12-to-6 curveball.” Any well-thrown baseball (except a knuckleball, but that’s another story) does have substantial spin that can bend its trajectory one way or another—depending on how it’s thrown—because the ball’s uneven surface creates more drag, or air friction, on one side of the ball than the other. A ninety-mile-an-hour fastball, for example, should drop nearly three feet owing to gravity, yet it falls less than two feet thanks to backspin-generated lift. It doesn’t rise, though. The perceived pop owes a lot to shattered expectations, as does the drop of a curveball.

I recall watching Kent Tekulve—who played as a Pittsburgh Pirates reliever from 1974 to 1985—use a peculiar underhand, or “submarine delivery,” to make a baseball follow what appeared to be a decidedly non-Newtonian path to the batter. As doubtful as it once seemed to me, however, a thrown baseball obeys all the conventional aerodynamic laws of physics. A. Terry Bahill, a systems engineer at the University of Arizona, and colleagues including David G. Baldwin, a former major-league relief pitcher with an engineering degree and a Ph.D. in genetics, have reams of data to prove it. They can demonstrate that the rising fastball and the drop curve are persuasive tricks, caused by the brain incorrectly processing information to predict the location of the pitched ball.

While playing sports, we almost continuously form mental models of motion in our minds. Outfielders can compute where a fly ball will land just a few moments after it leaves the bat, freeing them to devote their full attention to running to the correct spot on the field. Similarly, you might think a batter could guess where a pitch would be likely to cross home plate.

By equipping players with special glasses that precisely track eye and head movements, Bahill has shown that a batter’s attention is fixed on the ball as it is released, and for the first two-thirds of its flight path his eyes smoothly track the motion of the ball. During this focused tracking, the eyes gather data that the brain busily assembles into a model of where the ball will be when it gets within hitting range, and when that will be.

About the time the batter starts to swing—when the ball is about nineteen feet from home—the batter’s eyes suddenly jump to where he anticipates the bat–ball meeting will take place. Why? Because it’s the only way the eye can move fast enough to keep up with the incoming ball. Now that mental model comes into play. Across that brief gap, the ball’s arc is computed by the brain without further reference to the real world. By the time the batter’s eyes pick up the actual ball again, it’s too late in the swing to reposition the bat.

To accurately predict where and when the eye will reacquire the horsehide target, the brain needs position information. As the ball travels toward the batter, its image on the retina gets bigger, and we are very good at translating that change in size into a time of arrival for the ball. For a fastball taking about two-fifths of a second to travel to the plate, the average person can predict its time of flight to within twenty-five thousandths of a second. Although impressively close, that spread in timing would result in a spray of foul balls and misses; there is only a window of plus or minus nine-thousandths of a second for fair balls. Bahill has shown the pros do considerably better at this timing task, estimating the time of arrival to within plus or minus five-thousandths of a second.

It’s an oddity of the way our visual system works that batters can accurately model the “when” of the ball’s arrival by directly observing it, but the “where” is another matter. That variable depends on knowing things that are hard to estimate visually: the ball’s distance from the batter, and the rate and direction of its spin. To put these parameters into a mental model, the batter relies on cues such as the pattern of the moving ball’s gray-and-red blur (different angles of spin look different); the posture of the pitcher, especially his arm and hand; the point at which the pitcher releases the ball; and expectations of ball speed derived from previous pitches. Herein lies the secret to that hoppin’ fastball.

If the pitcher can fool the batter about the speed of the pitch, even just a little bit, the effect is a startling difference between where the batter expects the ball and where it actually appears. For example, a few ninety-mile-an-hour fastballs set up the batter to expect more of the same heaters. If the next pitch is 5.5 percent faster, at ninety-five miles per hour, the ball will appear at its point of impact with the bat three inches above where the slower pitch would have. A batter using a mental model to follow the ball perceives that as a sudden leap upwards as the ball comes back into his region of focus.

That perceptual jump can also explain the phenomenon of the diving curve. While a curve ball certainly does curve, there is a particular pitch that appears to the batter to behave quite badly. Players often say “that one rolled off a table” to describe a ball that drops, or “breaks hard,” just before the plate. Bahill and his colleagues report that in this case, the pitcher has fooled the batter into thinking the ball is moving faster than it is, leading to a perceptual drop when the ball appears below where the batter expects it.

Faced with such deceit, maybe batters would be better off just closing their eyes. Then again, if they keep them open, they can learn the specific tricks a pitcher employs to throw off their clear perception of the ball’s flight. That could explain why some hurlers have great success early in their careers, but then lose their mystique as batters catch on to them.



My little brother and I grew up on Rollerblades, the terrestrial version of ice skates. We raced on the rumpled streets of New York City, from Greenwich Village north to Central Park, ecstatic not to be circling a small oval of ice. In those days I held two major misconceptions about skating:  I imagined that we were pioneering a new form of long-distance transport, and I thought skating was easier than running because of its gliding phase. In neither case was I close to the truth.

As far back as the Bronze Age, 3,000 years ago, skates helped people travel more widely. And it turns out that skating is extremely efficient, taking advantage of biomechanical properties of the muscles throughout the movement cycle—not only during the glide.

To an unmechanized Europe and Russia, ice skates were one of the first useful tools for making winter trips between towns. And since the joys of skating are best appreciated on long stretches of smooth black ice, it comes as little surprise that ice skates made their first appearance on relatively flat, snowless waterways.

Early skates were constructed of trimmed horse or cow bones, pierced at one end and strapped to the foot with leather thongs. Rather than being powered by the classic skating motion, those beauties were used in tandem with a long stick; skaters straddled the stick and poled themselves along. Bone blades gave way to iron ones and then to steel. By the 1800s the idea of a steel blade grafted to a fitted leather boot had firmly taken hold.  (Although most skaters still use that design today, the ultimate innovation in the skating world was the "klap" skate; it has a hinge that allows the skater to extend the ankle while pushing, which boosts speeds by 5 percent.)

The advent of thinner blades and a firm attachment to the foot signaled a transition to the longer strides of a modern skater. Those extended strides give skating its advantage over unassisted modes of transport (such as running) because, as it happens, the slower a muscle contracts, the greater the force it develops. To understand how that force difference works on the molecular level, imagine the muscle fiber as a “rope”: slow contractions pull the rope hand-over-hand, as if hauling a bucket from a well; rapid contractions grab and quickly release the rope—delivering a smaller relative force. Since skaters’ leg muscles can contract quite slowly, even at very high speeds, they generate more force during each stride cycle. And that slow contraction can be maintained  thanks to the fact that less lateral force—the outward push against the ice—is needed at higher speeds. Thus the strides get longer and the skate tracks become more parallel to the direction of travel.




In 2006 when the U.S. military retired the F-14 Tomcat—of Top Gun fame—the most successful experiment in “swing-wing” airplanes was also grounded. Such planes rely on an intuitively appealing design idea: change the shape of the wing in flight and you can optimize the plane’s performance over a range of speeds. Unfortunately, even as the best of its kind, the Tomcat was a poor imitation of its biological inspiration—birds that morph their wings in flight. It’s been hard, though, for engineers to disentangle the wing changes in birds that are aerodynamically advantageous from the changes a wing must make for flapping. Now, thanks to an elegant study of swifts, investigators have their first empirical look at the effects of variable wing shape on bird flight.

Swifts belong to the family Apodidae, which literally means “without feet” in Latin. Footless may be a bit of an exaggeration, but it’s pretty near the mark. The birds’ tiny feet seldom touch down because feeding, courting, and even sleeping all take place on the fly. Because swifts glide for long distances—without complicating things for observers by flapping their wings—and because they change the geometry of their wings in flight, they make an ideal bird with which to study the advantages of wing morphing.

Overall, the swift wing resembles a long, thin, curved blade that tapers to a sharp point, much like that of a scythe. Structurally, the wing closely resembles your arm: remove or fuse a few bones, add some feathers, and you just about have it. When the wings flap, as when your arms do, chest muscles power their motion.

In essence, those sets of bones give swifts, and all flying birds, two feathered airfoils on each wing, crucial to flapping in flight. One airfoil is made up of primary flight feathers attached to the wingtip bones. The other is formed by the secondary flight feathers attached to the forelimb bones. The swift, however, gains added maneuverability by having an unusually large proportion of its wing made up of the “hand,” or wingtip, bones, compared with typical birds. By changing the “wrist” angle between the “hand” and forelimb, the swift can change both the shape of the wing and its area [see illustrations left].

David Lentink, a biomechanist at Wageningen University in the Netherlands, and a team of aerodynamicists from the Netherlands and Sweden measured swift wings in a range of natural flight configurations. One of the most important factors, they discovered, is the aforementioned angle between the hand and the forelimb. Folding the wrist knocks a whopping 30 percent off the wing area.

Lentink and his colleagues also attached wings (from birds that had died in sanctuaries) to a finely calibrated balance in a wind tunnel, to measure how various wing geometries alter drag and lift. Drag is the force that acts in the same direction as the airflow, whereas lift acts perpendicular to airflow. Drag and lift, along with a bird’s mass, determine the biologically important variables of gliding flight. For swifts with unfolded wrists and outstretched wings flying in a straight line, Lentink and his colleagues determined that a speed of about twenty miles an hour gives the birds the maximum gliding time and the steadiest flight path for the least energy. So even though outstretched wings provide more drag, the wide spread gives a lot more lift for level flights.




That fits well with what is known about swift “roosting” behavior: tracking the birds on radar as they sleep on the wing shows that they glide and periodically flap to maintain an average speed of twenty miles per hour, and to minimize altitude lost per minute. In other words, they glide at a speed that requires minimum energy during their snooze time.
At high speeds, however, the advantage swiftly shifts to swept-back wings. Swifts are called swifts, after all, because their peak flight speed is so high. They have been clocked at more than sixty miles an hour—no wonder they fall asleep at twenty! It turns out that sweeping the wings back becomes key to energy efficiency at fast cruising speeds of more than forty miles an hour. At those higher speeds, the swept wings, which minimize drag, become more efficient both in maintaining a shallow-angle glide and in maximizing the time spent aloft.

If straight-line flying benefits from spread wings at lower speeds and swept wings at higher speeds, what about turning? The F-14 Tomcat spread its wings wide for increased maneuverability during dogfights, which demand lots of fast turns. Keeping the spread-wing shape when turning is also a good strategy for the swift—at least at twenty miles an hour. At that velocity, a swift can turn at least twice as fast by spreading its wings as it can by bending them.

In higher-speed turns, however—as simulated in the wind tunnel—it becomes impossible to measure the relative efficiency of spread and swept wings, because beginning around thirty-four miles an hour, spread swift wings become vulnerable to damage from aerodynamic stress. At high speeds they naturally flex and twist slightly in the turbulent air, and so avoid being damaged by the high forces. So, when pursuing fast-flying and fast-turning insect lunches, a swift bends its wings to keep up; the calories from such a meal warrant the extra effort.

Human attempts at variable wing geometry have always been hampered by the complexity and weight associated with a system engineered from hinges. Students working with Lentink are now building flexible, lightweight aircraft the size of swifts, capable of wing morphing. If such devices can be scaled up, fighter pilots could have a fast, agile plane that could slow down and spread its wings to hold station and maximize its time in the air. Even then, though, the pilots probably won’t be dozing off.


There is something about a turtle on its back that twists your heart. With neck craning toward the ground and legs waving to no effect, it is the image of helplessness. But, malicious kids aside, turtles almost never end up upended. And it turns out that the apparent risk factor for that predicament—the turtle’s rigid carapace—is less a liability than an asset, surprisingly well-suited to the turtle’s goal of righting itself. The secret is in the mathematics of its shape.

Many a truly difficult mathematical problem can be stated in an approachable and deceptively simple way. Can you, for example, cut a convex shape from a uniform sheet of plywood that will only sit one way when balanced on edge? By “convex,” I mean that there are no dents in the outline: a straight line drawn between any two points along the edge will stay inside the shape. A plywood square, for example, has four edges on which it will happily balance (if you ignore the third dimension and forget that it could flop over sideways). In addition, it has an unstable balance point on each corner—a point on which it can balance, but so precariously that even the smallest perturbation will send it tumbling. A triangle comes one step closer in the quest for a shape with only one balance point: it has three stable positions and three unstable ones. An ellipse has two of each. It turns out that this is the very best you can do. No amount of trimming or trickery will get you a single stable equilibrium point in this essentially two-dimensional case.


Resembling the Gömböc, the shape of its shell gives an Indian star tortoise only one stable configuration: on its feet!
Illustration by Joe Sharkey
You might come to that conclusion based on trial and error; proving it mathematically, however, was not a trivial exercise. Gábor Domokos, of the Budapest University of Technology and Economics, successfully tackled that challenge. He then sought to extend the proof into three dimensions. It is tempting to believe that, as in the 2-D case, the best you can do is two stable equilibria and two unstable ones, but Domokos came up with a counterexample. Consider a rod with both ends cut off obliquely [See Figure 1]. It rolls around on the table and stops with the long side down every time. It has just one stable configuration. On the other hand, it has three unstable equilibria: balanced on either pointy end or with the shorter side down. Is that the best we can do? What about a shape that has just one stable equilibrium and a single unstable one—a mono-monostable object, in mathematicians’ parlance? In the 3-D world we are all familiar with Weebles™, those cute plastic toys that wobble but don’t fall down. They fit the bill, but they violate a key condition of the plywood problem: they have a little metal weight in the bottom. Is it possible to construct a Weeble that isn’t weighted, one that rights itself just by virtue of its rotund little shape?

The trial-and-error answer is "no," but that seldom impresses a mathematician. Domokos, joined by his graduate student Péter Várkonyi (now also a professor at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics), began to work seriously on the problem. Using a spherical coordinate system, they constructed formulas that slightly squashed a sphere, added a pair of extra flattened planes on the surface (which they call "raceways"), and pressed one side into a sharp edge. For reasons that are clear only to native speakers of Hungarian, they called this sensuous shape a Gömböc (pronounced something like "gumboots"). Though it existed as a mathematical construct, Várkonyi and Domokos did not truly appreciate how interesting the shape was until they had a model made with a 3-D printer. With the Gömböc in hand, they were struck by the similarity of its shape to the highly domed shell of the Indian star tortoise (Geochelone elegans).


Illustrating the difference between an unstable and a stable equilibrium, a plywood triangle (top), regarded as a two-dimensional object, may balance precariously on one of its three points or come to rest on one of its three long sides. Similarly, a rod with both ends sliced off at oblique angles (middle) teeters on its short side—as it would if stood on either pointed end—but finds stability on its long side. Designed by mathematicians, the Gömböc (bottom) never rests for long on any point except its one and only stable surface.
Illustration by Joe Sharkey
 

Domokos and Várkonyi turned their attention to the possibility that the Gömböc shape was a naturally occurring example of a mono-monostatic object. They looked at seventeen species of turtles, including high-domed tortoises and flatter pond turtles. By determining the curves that captured the 3-D shape of each turtle shell, they translated the animals into the same mathematical language as the Gömböc. It quickly became clear that tortoises are indeed quite close to being monostable: when placed on its back, a tortoise will roll right side up with just a little perturbation. But pond turtles are quite stable when placed on their backs and must use their necks and ninja-turtle footwork to lever themselves over. (In reality, that rarely becomes necessary, since they stay in or near water, where sudden inversion is not common.)

Of course, tortoises have an advantage over the Gömböc in that they have four legs to flail around, which moves their center of gravity enough so that they will wobble right side up without an outside influence. They are also not really of uniform density, and the placement of the lungs high in the dome certainly makes them more like a Weeble than a Gömböc. The similarities are striking enough, however, both for tortoises and for certain species of beetles, that it seems natural selection has been hard at work smoothing their form into a Hungarian tongue twister.


Moray eels, to my certain knowledge, will bite if provoked. They belong to a family of elongated bony fishes with an impressive dental battery (Muraenidae), and my right hand has distinct impressions to prove it. My scars came from an encounter on the Great Barrier Reef with a hungry eel chomping at the chopped fish I was feeding to a group of groupers. The moray’s bite beached me and left me with one good hand to gingerly eat my meals for the next month.

Not only do bony fishes lack hands or gripping forelimbs of any kind to reposition their meal, they are also deprived in the food-processing department by the total absence of a tongue. That leaves the fishes’ jaws to do all of the work of converting whole prey into edible morsels. Some bony fish simply skip playing with their food and eat it whole; others, like bluefish, use cutting teeth to reduce the prey size, then swallow each piece whole. But the vast majority of bony fishes use a set of tools deep in their throat: a second pair of toothy jaws that can split, slice, tear, or crush food as it goes down the gullet.
The back-of-the-throat choppers are called pharyngeal jaws, and they come in an astonishing array of sizes, shapes, and functions—all derived from gill arches, which hold in place the bright-red respiratory structures that lie behind the cheeks of most fishes. Pharyngeal jaws are equipped with their own set of teeth and move completely independently of the oral jaws. Still, the problem persists of how to move prey back from the mouth jaws to the throat set. Suction usually works. But moray eels, it turns out, have a way to use their pharyngeal jaws that’s pretty shocking, right out of the movie Alien.

Rita Mehta, currently based at the University of California in Davis, is an expert on snakes’ feeding behavior, so when she teamed up with fish biomechanist Peter Wainwright, also at Davis, she focused on the snakiest of fishes. For their body size, moray eels can eat extremely large prey, such as octopus, making Mehta think there might be an interesting story in how they manage to choke down such huge meals. Snakes have a mobile upper jaw which can ratchet from left to right, allowing a snake to “walk” its head down the length of its prey without ever releasing it from the grip of at least one side of the jaws. What about the eels?

Mehta started by using high-speed video to record adult reticulated morays (Muraena retifera) as they ate pieces of squid. The movies allowed her to really slow down the action, which showed that the food was hauled into the eel’s mouth rather jerkily. That was hard to understand, but the mystery deepened when an eel ate with its mouth particularly wide open—and the camera caught a flash of something moving, something that seemed to come out of the throat and grab the prey. The pharyngeal jaws seemed unlikely candidates, since in moray eels they are set very far back in the body, well behind the back of the skull.
Mehta set to finding out by using a fluoroscope, an X-ray machine that allows movies to be taken of moving bones. In a small glass tank that minimized the difficulty of filming through water, she fed a reticulated moray a live fish. The video showed something a little intimidating. After the moray grabbed lunch in its mouth, the pharyngeal jaws started sliding forward, all the way up the throat, until their sharp teeth were even with the eel’s eye.
Dissection revealed that muscles connect the moray’s upper pharyngeal jaws to the skull just behind the eyes, and also run from the lower pharyngeal jaws to the point of the eel’s chin. When the eel contracts those muscles, the throat jaws open and slide forward, almost out of the mouth of the eel [see illustration above]. The pharyngeal jaws then close on the part of the prey that is most deeply in the mouth and drag it back towards the stomach. The eels seem to use their secondary jaws about 90 percent of the time.

A moray eel has another method of dealing with large prey. It will loop its body around a victim, similar to the way a python does; but rather than constricting its prey, a moray pulls its head through the loop, holding the victim in a knot while ripping off bite-size chunks of flesh. For the vast majority of prey species, which are too small for that, the morays use the Alien method, ratcheting them down the hatch without letting go. The strategy is like a snake’s, but morays evolved to ratchet front to back, rather than left to right.

In looking at my scar, I now suppose that I am lucky a second set of tooth marks isn’t inside the first, reducing the utility of my already sad-looking digiti minimi.