 By virtue of their embedded, mineralized skeletons,
sponges are of great interest to materials scientists, chemists,
palaeontologists, geologists, and biologists.
As the most basal metazoans, they are the
key to understanding the evolution of both
calcium- and silicon-based biomineralization.
The manifestation of this mineralization,
a skeleton of spicules embedded
in the body of the sponge, is typically a
complex arrangement of calcite or silica.
For example, the skeletal spicules of glass
sponges (Hexactinellida, Porifera) are valuable
model systems for the investigation
of structure-function relationships in biomaterials,
with the ultimate goal of identifying
design strategies for new synthetic
materials. [1]
 Natural structural composites
often show a variety of desirable properties,
including transient properties in the presence
of water. [2,3]
 The hexactinellid sponges
have silica skeletal structures that are both
fl exible and tough, [1,4,5]
 because of their hierarchically layered
structure and the hydrated state of the silica. [6]
 Emblematic of
the complexity of sponge skeletons is Euplectella aspergillum ,
in which the skeleton is an elaborate cylindrical latticelike structure with at least six hierarchical levels of organization
spanning the length scale from nanometers to centimetres. [5]
The basic elements are laminated spicules that consist of a
proteinaceous axial fi lament surrounded by alternating concentric
domains of consolidated silica nanoparticles and organic
interlayers.
 Spicules assigned to hexactinellids are known from the earliest
part of the animal fossil record (Ediacaran, 630 to 542 My). [7]
Their skeletons appear to have been optimized by natural selection
to provide structural support, and as an inert scaffold for
various tissues encompassing a variety of functions. Organic
molecules including silicateins, [8]
 or more recently discovered
collagen [9]
 and chitin [10–12]
 are responsible for both the biosilicifi
cation and for the specifi c mechanical properties of their
skeletons. These molecules and their functions are currently
the subject of detailed discussions in modern chemical biology.
The skeletal structures of glass sponges are also remarkable
due to their size, durability, fl exibility, and optical properties, [13]
however, numerous questions regarding the chemistry/biology
interface of these mostly unique constructions remain open.
 Deep-ocean currents are generally perceived as sluggish,
but at intermediate depths (1000 to 5000 m) a is steady fl ow
is present, in which the current speeds up and slows down
as it encounters variations in terrain. [14]
 Sponges are sessile
organisms that fi lter great volumes of seawater to collect food
particles and resolved organic matter, and they rely partly on
ambient water currents; many are also raised above the sea fl oor
on spicular stalks in order to better exploit them. Photographs
of deep-sea hexactinellids, in natural conditions, demonstrate
remarkable fl exibility and resilience of the stalks. [14]
 Because
the spicules are made from a brittle material this fl exibility is
unexpected. The primary goal of the current study was to investigate
the chemistry and the peculiarities of structural organization
in the spicular stalk and body spicules of the hexactinellid
sponge Caulophacus species . ( Figure 1 ). [15–17]
 2. Results
 2.1. Clublike Structures Within the Sponge’s Skeletal Framework
Caulophacus , including its subgenus C. (Caulophacus) , are
mushroom-shaped sponges that are attached to hard substrates
by a long stalk. The atrial cavity is turned out, and represented
by the upper surface of the cap (Figure 1 A,B). The tubular stalk
is primarily constructed from long diactine (two rayed) spicules
that are connected to their neighbors by numerous articulations
(Figure 1 C–E) or by bridges (Figure 1 F–G) through secondary
silica deposition. The stalk is fi xed to the substratum by a basydictional
plate, which contains mostly hexactines (six-rayed spicules)
fused to each other at points of contact. The subgenus
is cosmopolitan, being distributed in all oceans and in some
seas with “normal” salinity at a depth of 130–6770 m. Currently
about 15 species are known.
 Individual spicules were isolated from the Caulophacus sp .
stalk using pincers. We observed clublike constructions
( Figure 2 A,B) at the ends of separated spicules using scanning
electron microscopy (SEM). These spinose, clublike structures
were also observed in light microscopy images (Figure 2 C).
To obtain more detailed information about localization of
these specifi c structures within the spicular articulations, we
employed gentle desilicifi cation using a 2.5 M NaOH solution at
37 ° C, as described previously. [9,10]
 After 14 days of immersion,
the clublike constructions could be observed as being located
within articulations using both light microscopy (Figure 2 D)
and SEM (Figure 2 E,F). Detailed analysis of the SEM images [18]
revealed that the spiny surfaces on these spicules could be
coupled with each other, preventing slippage against the corresponding
silica-based articulation ( Figure 3 ). This structure is
unique and evolved as a natural engineering solution to structural
integrity problems in the construction of the hierarchical
skeletons of glass sponges.
 Siliceous monaxon spicules with various spination patterns
are well described in the sponge literature. [19]
 It has been
hypothesized that this phenomenon results from hypersilicifi cation
related to a high silica concentration in water. [20]
 However,
during alkali-based desilicifi cation experiments we observed
that the spines of the clublike structures were highly resistant
to alkali treatment, in contrast to the surface silica layers, which
are deeply corroded under these conditions (Figure 3 ).
 2.2. Identifi cation of Calcite-Silica Composite
 In order to proceed with more detailed studies, we mechanically
disrupted several spicules showing the clublike constructions, as
shown in Figure 4 A. SEM images of these broken elements show
that the spines possess central structures, covered with a layer of
silica (Figure 4 B). Elemental mapping (Figure 4 C) and energy dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) (Figure 4 D) unambiguously show
that calcium and not silicon is the main component of this central
structure (see the Supporting Information, Figure S1). Atomic
absorption spectroscopy [18]
 also confi rmed the presence of calcium
in this spicular material , at an average concentration of 37.8 ±
9.0 ng mg − 1
 (mean ± standard deviation, s.d.), corresponding to
3.78 ± 0.90 mass percent of calcium in the whole spicule.
 The chemical nature of the mineral phases within the
club-like structures was then investigated by means of
photoemission spectroscopy (PES) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy
(XAS) (Figure 4 E,F), performed on untreated spicules
of Caulophacus sp. The appearance of Si 2p photoemission
demonstrates the presence of silicon in all spicules, and
the exact position of the peak on the binding energy scale
grants an insight into its chemical bonding. Pure silicon is
observed at 100 eV bond energy, whereas SiO 2 is found at
105 eV. SiO x compounds are observed between 100 and 105 eV
according to their stoichiometry (Figure 4 E). The observed
bond energy of about 103 eV suggests that the silicon compound
in the spicules has a silicium-to-oxygen ratio of 1:1,2.
Therefore we hypothesize that silicon oxide is present in
these skeletal structures in a bound form. This stoichiometry
rules out foreign particles as a source of the silica signal.
Also, XAS spectra obtained for each of the sponge samples
(Figure 4 F) show a strong signal at the Ca 2p absorption
edge. The fi ne structure of the near-edge X-ray absorption pattern
closely resembles that of calcite. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and electron diffraction analysis (EDA) of
the untreated clublike structures ( Figure 5 A,B) further confi rm
these results. TEM diffraction analysis of the spicule shows
the presence of two phases, one amorphous (Figure 5 C) and
one crystalline (Figure 5 D). EDA for the spines shown as a
TEM image in Figure 5 B correspond to the (0001) zone axis
of calcite with d spacings: 100 (1010) 4.32 Å; 010 (0110) 4.32
Å and 210 (2110) 2.49 Å. These data correlate well with those
reported previously for calcite identifi ed in other invertebrates
using the electron diffraction technique. [21]
 The microstructure
of the central calcite crystals isolated by alkali treatment from
the clublike structures (Figure 5 D) is also very similar to the
morphology of calcite crystal nuclei described previously [18,22]
(see Supporting Information, Figure S2). Further analysis
of the crystals (Figure 5 E) isolated from clublike structures
after alkali-based desilicifi cation was achieved by infrared
(IR) (see the Supporting Information, Figure S3) and Raman
(Figure 5 F) spectroscopy. The obtained FTIR spectra as well as
Raman spectra unambiguously confi rm the calcite nature of
these crystals.
 3. Discussion
 Mechanical testing of the spicules suggests an important
strengthening role for the observed structures. Microindentation
tests of the sponge architecture demonstrated only
slight plastic deformation (one micrometer or less), compared
with tens of micrometers of elastic deformation. Moreover, 
buckling events were clearly seen on the indentation curves (see
the Supporting Information, Figure S4A). The sponge has rigid
outer layer (thickness 150 μ m) where the spicules are interconnected
more densely. This area has a reduced E-modulus
(REM) of 14.9 ± 4.5 MPa with the minimal measured value of
1.45 MPa. The bulk material of the sponge is softer and is relatively
isotropic. The REM of the sponge in the axial direction
was 614 ± 173 kPa, whereas in areas where single spicules protrude,
it was just 3.82 ± 1.34 kPa (see the Supporting Information,
Figure S4). The inner surface of the sponge has a reduced
number of cross-linking spicules and spicules with orientation
parallel to the surface, which explains the small REM values of
the innermost part of the sponge (REM 4.3 ± 0.5 kPa). However,
after 100 μ m of compression of the soft layer, the sponge
material has REM of 618 ± 200 kPa (see the Supporting Information,
Figure S4B), equaling that of the bulk sponge material.
 The challenge now is to understand the mechanisms by
which this unique biocomposite is initially formed, at high pressure
(420 ATM) and at low temperature (between 2 and 4 ° C). In
most cases, calcifi cation in sponges is confi ned to an extracellular
space delineated by tightly adhering sclerocyte cells. [20]
 The
sclerocytes secrete a macromolecular matrix to the extracellular
space, which comprises a genetically programmed, threedimensional
framework that guides spicule formation. It is diffi -
cult to differentiate between organically mediated and inorganic
precipitation, and a combination of different mechanisms in the
same species cannot be ruled out. A decisive factor for the control
of nucleation of calcium carbonate is the development of local
supersaturation with respect to calcite or to any other calcium
carbonate polymorph. This in turn depends on the levels of calcium
and carbonate ion activities. The latter depend strongly on
local pH as the dissolution of CO 2 is favored at higher pH values.
Seawater may become supersaturated with respect to calcium
carbonate especially in spatially confi ned structures. The inner
space of the Caulophacus sp . spicule represents a microchannel
of approximately 1.0 μ m in diameter fl ooded with ionic solution,
while one extremity of the spicule is sealed by the silica. At
these conditions, contact with silicic surfaces is expected to favor
heterogeneous nucleation of calcite, as in this case lower supersaturation
is needed in comparison with the value needed for
homogeneous. For example, calculation of the saturation of calcite
at 2,000 meters, 5 ° C and pH between 7.62 and 8.22 yielded 
values between 49 and 184, respectively. [23]
 Calcite is expected to
precipitate at a saturation exceeding 100, a value which corresponds
for the ion activity of seawater to pH 8.00.
 The observed morphology of this silica–calcite biocomposite
can be understood as the result of the crystallization of calcite
crystals in the presence of polymeric silica. [24]
 Garcia-Ruiz
et al. [25]
 obtained numerous peculiar forms of alkaline-earth
metal carbonates in high-pH silica gel, which indicated that
silicate anions interact strongly with carbonates. Furthermore,
layers of silicates have been deposited on the surface of calcite,
[26,27]
 a fact supporting crystallographic affi nity for the two
inorganic solids. It has also been shown in vitro that a complex
crystalline architecture can be induced through the miniaturization
of the growth subunits by covering the surface of carbonate
crystals with silicate anions and by the self-organized
assembly of the miniaturized subunits. [28]
 The silica–calcitebased
clublike structures made by Caulophacus sp . are the fi rst
natural example of this principle, which confi rms that biomineralization
is a process in which organisms produce mineral
solutions for their own functional requirements, [29]
 starting on
nano- and microlevels of structural hierarchy.
 Although poriferan skeletons may be composed of a large
variety of minerals, calcium carbonate and siliceous structures
very rarely co-occur in the same sponge. The only previously
known examples are in the form of solid calcareous skeletons
in addition to siliceous spicules, or as small calcareous spherules
[30]
 or granules [31]
 in siliceous spiculate sponges. None of
these constitute biocomposites, and no sponge with calcareous
spicules has yet been found to secrete silica also.
 It is less clear how the skeletons of early sponges were constructed,
and this is of great signifi cance in palaeontology and
early animal phylogeny. It has been argued that the different 
secretion mechanisms of spicules in Silicispongia ( Demospongiae
and Hexactinellida ) and Calcarea preclude homologous biomineralization
between the sponge classes. [32]
 However, the heteractinid
sponge Eiffelia globosa shows features characteristic of both
groups, and spicules have a bilayered structure suggestive of a
silica–carbonate biocomposite. [33]
 The presence of a silica–calcite
composite in extant hexactinellids suggests that the mechanism
of secretion is fl exible in the precise structures formed,
and that extant and early sponges share a common biochemical
basis for secreting both materials. Although the structures of the 
skeletal elements themselves may have changed, as well as the
cytological architecture, the mineralogical secretion processes are
likely to be homologous. If similar structures to those in Caulophacus
are confi rmed in other taxa, the widespread presence of silica–calcite
composites in the silicisponge lineage but not the calcareans,
would tend to support an ancestral carbonate spicule mineralogy
for Porifera . More data are needed from other sponge groups
before the full implications of such fi ndings will be known.
 4. Conclusions
 Structural design of biological materials has evolved under
extreme evolutionary pressures to ensure the survival of a species,
often in adverse environments. [34]
 We can now outline the
factors that are important for the highly deformable and resilient
structure of the glass sponge stalk. Typically, slender rods
of small dimension are stiffer than expected. [17]
 Stress concentration
near holes and notches is dissipated by materials with
microstructure such as the glass sponge stalk. In a foamlike
construction, a stiff and brittle material of single cells contributes
to the volume, but not to the stiffness of the construction.
In foamlike sponge construction, the largest structural fi brelike
elements appear to govern the fracture toughness and the
localization of microdamage. Twisting or bending of the fi berbased
construction is an additional degree of freedom that dissipates
stress. Additionally, clavate-shaped, spine-covered ends
of spicule, which are made of crystalline calcite, are responsible
for a mechanical interlocking of single spicule with each other.
A combination of two different materials at the level of single
spicule (see the Supporting Information, Figure S5), the interlocking
system between spicules, and the fi brous composite
construction of the sponge stalk, make the entire construction
mechanically stable and simultaneously very fl exible under
mechanically challenging environmental conditions. Intriguingly,
the concept of turning weakness into strength based
on the university-diversity-principle (UDP), [34]
 in the case of
Caulophacus sp . sponge, can be discussed as very specifi c
because of the presence of two different inorganic materials.
In contrast to this siliceous sponge, diatoms, for example, can
transform a brittle biosilica into a ductile, strong, and tough
material, solely through alterations of its structural arrangement
at the nanoscale. [35,36]
 Thus, mechanical response of diatoms
cell walls can be greatly altered by simple alteration of their
structural geometry without the need to introduce new constituents.
[35]
 Clearly, the future development of the comparative
computational models [37]
 of glass sponges and diatoms, as two
different biosilica-based and nanostructurally organized hierarchical
systems, represents a scientifi c task of great interest.
 The silica–calcite composite structures described here represent
an additional example of multiphase biomineralizationphenomenon
recently discussed by us. [38]
 Up to know, is is not
known why some organisms utilize, for example, silica rather
than calcium carbonate as a structural material. However, in
the case of extreme deep-sea environmental conditions, Mother
Nature decides to use both mineral phases within one very
complex designed skeletal network, which is defi nitively essential
for biological survival of the fi ttest organism.
 5. Experimental Section
Sponge Samples : The investigated Caulophacus sp . specimens were
captured during the 22 nd cruise of the R.V. “Academic Mstislav Keldysh”
in the N-E Pacifi c, off Bering Island, stn. 2316, 55 o 36,08-35’N 167 o 23,04-
24,46’ E, 4200-4294 m. Stalks of Caulophacus sp . were treated according
to the following procedure. Sponge material was stored for several
days in fresh sea-water. The sponge was dried afterwards for 4 days at
45 ° C. Finally the sponge skeletal material was cleaned in 10% H 2 O 2
and dried again at 45 ° C. Tissue-free dried sponge material was washed
three times in distilled water, cut into 3 cm long pieces and placed in a
solution containing purifi ed Clostridium histolyticum collagenase (Sigma)
to digest any possible collagen contamination of exogenous nature. After
incubation for 24 h at 15 ° C, the pieces of glass sponge skeleton were
again washed three times in distilled water, dried and placed in a 15 mL
vessel containing chitinase solution (as described by us previously) [10]
 to
digest any possible exogenous chitin contaminations. After incubation
for 48 h at 25 ° C, fragments of skeleton were again washed, dried, and
placed in 10 mL plastic vessels for storage and analysis.
Chemical Etching of Glass Sponge Skeleton : 8 mL of 2.5 M NaOH
(Fluka) solution was added to the 10 mL plastic vessel, which contains
fragments of the Caulophacus sp . stalks, purifi ed as described above.
The vessel was covered and placed under thermostatic conditions at
37 ° C without shaking. The same procedure was carrying out using
0.01% solution of HF (puriss. p.a., Fluka). The effectiveness of the alkali
desilicifi cation procedures was also monitored using optical microscopy
and SEM at different locations along the length of spicular material and
within the cross-sectional area.
Atom Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS) : A Varian SpectrAA-10
spectrometer with Varian GTA-96 graphite furnace atomizer was used to
determine the concentration of calcium within the purifi ed samples of
Caulophacus. sp . spicules. Three samples were weighed into Eppendorf
microvials, dissolved by adding 100 μ L HF to each sample and
homogenised for 30 s by shaking. Each sample was diluted with 900 μ L
purifi ed water and again homogenised. A wavelength of 239.9 nm was
used to measure absorption by calcium.
Photoemission Spectroscopy (PES) and X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy
(XAS): Measurements were performed at MAX-lab (Lund University,
Sweden) using radiation from the beamline D1011 bending magnet
dipole beamline located at the MAX II storage ring. X-ray absorption
spectra in the vicinity of the Ca 2p absorption threshold were recorded
in total electron yield (TEY) mode with a MCP detector. Photoemission
of the Si 2p core-level was obtained at 200 eV photon energy using a
SCIENTA SES200 electron energy analyzer.
 Supporting Information
 Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or
from the author.
 Acknowledgements
 We thank Prof. H. Lichte for use of the facilities at the Special Electron
Microscopy Laboratory for high-resolution and holography at Triebenberg,
TU Dresden, Germany. The authors thank R. Lakes, G. Wörheide,
G. Bavestrello for helpful discussions. The authors are deeply grateful to
R. Schulze, H. Meissner, G. Richter, O. Trommer for excellent technical
assistance. This work was partially supported by the DFG (Grant Nos. EH
394/1-1; MO 1049/5-1, ME 1256/7-1 ME 1256/13-1, and WO 494/17-1)
and by the BMBF (Grant No. 03WKBH2G), by a joint program “Mikhail
Lomonosov - II” of DAAD (Ref-325; A/08/72558) and RMES (AVCP Grant
Nr. 8066), and by Erasmus Mundus Co-operation Window Programme
2009. Part of this study was supported, as part of the European Science
Foundation EUROCORES Programme FANAS, by the German Science 



Propulsive Functions of
Vertebral Columns
I n sharks and other fish, the
body’s primary skeleton is the vertebral
column, which runs from the
head to the caudal fin (Summers &
Long, 2006). The vertebral column is
a jointed framework to which muscles
attach and on which the muscles pull
to create the traveling waves of flexure
that transfer momentum from the
body to the surrounding fluid. The
vertebral column is composed of rigid
elements, called vertebrae, connected
by flexible intervertebral joints
(Grotmol et al., 2003; Koob &
Long, 2000). The joints and their
adjoining vertebrae limit the body’s kinematic
degrees of freedom, constraining
bending primarily to the lateral
direction in response to loads imposed
by muscle, inertia, and external fluid
forces (Grotmol et al., 2006; Porter
et al., 2009; Symmons, 1979; Schmitz,
1995). In this way, the vertebral
column functions to control dynamic
reconfigurations of the self-propelling
body.
In roll-stable sharks and fish, lateral
body bending is characterized by the
overlay of harmonic and transient motions
that range from small traveling
flexures to large-amplitude standing
waves (Long et al., 2010). These bending
motions produce the propulsive
forces that create forward swimming,
turning maneuvers, and rapid accelerations.
Across many different kinds of
fish, the stiffness of the bending joints,
measured as the apparent Young’s modulus,
E, ranges from 0.1 to 8 MPa
(Long et al., 2002). The E is a mechanical
property, sometimes called
the “material stiffness,” that measures
the contribution of the material, independent
of its geometric arrangement
in the structure, to the structure’s resistance
to changing shape when an external
load is applied to it.

Joints with any appreciable stiffness
at all may at first seem to be a paradox:
why not have low-stiffness joints that
cost little, in terms of mechanical
work, to bend? The answer seems to
be two-fold: (1) Stiff joints increase
their resistance, in terms of the absolute
bending moment, M (in units of
Nm), in proportion to the magnitude
of bending curvature, κ (m−1
). This resistance,
which can grow nonlinearly
with κ, serves as a brake, limiting
lateral bending (Long et al., 2002).
(2) Stiff joints store and release more
mechanical work, so-called “elastic
energy,” than flexible joints (Long,
1992). The amount of work released
in elastic recoil is also in proportion
to E and to the square of κ. Hence,
the vertebral column functions best
as a spring when muscles have reached
their functional limits, at the end of a
large-κ bend when connective tissues
are stiffest.
To explore the mechanical design
space of vertebral columns, we created
biomimetic vertebral columns (BVCs).
The BVCs are modeled after the vertebral
column of sharks. We chose
sharks’ vertebral columns since they
are structurally simple, compared to
those of bony fish, consisting of cylindrical
centra, small neural and hemal
arches, and thin intervertebral joints
(Figure 1). Together, a centrum and
its arches are called a vertebra, and in
the cartilaginous sharks, skates, and
rays, the vertebrae (plural form of
‘vertebra’) are composed of mineralized
cartilage. The compressive stiffness
of these vertebrae, measured by
E, ranges from 25 to 500 MPa, overlapping
the lower range of E for bone
(Porter et al., 2006). Compared to the
bone of mammals, for a given value of E
the vertebrae of sharks are stronger, where
strength is measured in terms of breaking
stress (Porter & Long, 2010). Thus,
in some ways, vertebral columns made of
mineralized cartilage perform better than
vertebral columns made of bone.
In summary, vertebral columns serve
at least three important propulsive functions
during swimming: (1) they control
dynamic reconfigurations of the body
by limiting the kinematic degrees of
freedom, (2) they brake high-amplitude
bends by virtue of their stiffness, and
(3) they integrate muscle work over
time by recoiling elastically.
To build a BVC that can function as
part of an aquatic propulsion system,
we (1) characterized the morphology
(size and shape) of the vertebral columns
of sharks, (2) measured the mechanical
properties of those vertebral
columns as they underwent sinusoidal
bending, (3) used that information
about morphology and mechanical
properties to design BVCs, (4) tested
BVCs as they underwent the dynamic
bending characteristic of swimming
and propulsion, and (5) tested the
BVCs as the primary skeleton in the
flapping tail of an aquatic robot.
Morphology of Sharks’
Vertebral Columns
In three individuals of the blacktip
shark, Carcharinus limbatus, and
the bonnethead shark, Sphryna
tiburo, we measured, from radiographs,
the following features from
the head to the beginning of the caudal
fin (Figure 2): (1) the length of centrum,
c, (2), the diameter of the centrum,
d, (3) the length of the intervertebral
joint, j, and (4) the cone angle, Ξ,
of the capsule of the joint. Blacktip
sharks, members of the family
Carcharhinidae, were chosen because

they are known to be fast swimming
predators of fish. In contrast,
bonnethead sharks, members of the
hammerhead family Sphyrnidae, are
known less for their speed and more
for their maneuverability and ability
to find and eat crustaceans. Of similar
adult body size, the two species
represent contrasting swimming styles
and ecologies. Three individuals of
each species were used for this study.
In the bonnethead shark, all the
morphological features, except d,
increased in size from the head to the
end of the abdomen and then decreased
towards the caudal fin (Figure 3). In
blacktip shark, only Ξ and c varied
from head to caudal fin. The significance
(α = 0.05) of the morphological
variation was determined with a
multivariate analysis of covariance
(MANCOVA), with species and position
as main effects and individual as
the covariate (JMP 8.0.2., SAS Institute,
Cary, NC). Following an identity
model MANCOVA, univariate
ANCOVAs were also run.
The variation in the morphology of
these vertebral columns was used to
guide the construction of the BVCs.
For each of the sharks’ morphological
features, we indicated which dimensions
were used (see black arrows on
the ordinates, Figure 3).
Mechanical Properties of
Sharks’ Vertebral Columns
Using the same freshly dissected
vertebral columns from which morphology
was measured, we conducted
3-point dynamic bending tests using
an MTS model Mini Bionix 858
(Eden Prairie, MN) with a 500 N
load cell. For blacktip sharks, each
vertebral column was cut into five
segments of 19 vertebrae each. For
bonnethead sharks, each vertebral
column was cut into five segments of
14 vertebrae each. The number of segments
in each species was varied to
keep the absolute length of each test
segment approximately equal. Each
segment was subjected to sinusoidal
bending at a frequency, f (Hz), and
maximum curvature, κ (m−1
), varied
to hold constant the time rate of
change of κ, which is equivalent to
the strain rate (actuator displacement
amplitude of 2 mm s−1
).
To characterize the viscoelastic
properties of the vertebral column during
bending, the apparent storage and
loss moduli, E′ and E″ (MPa), respectively,
were measured at each combination
of two species, five segment
positions, and three κ. The E′ measures
the purely elastic component of
the stiffness; it is the force proportional
to the magnitude of the bending of the
vertebral column. The E″ measures the
purely viscous component of the stiffness;
it is the force proportional to the
velocity of the bending of the vertebral
column. These properties were calculated
from the following formulae:
E′ ¼ E*cos δ and E″ ¼ E*sin δ,
wherein E* ¼ FmaxL3
48Iymax and δ is the
phase lag (radians) between the displacement
and load signals. Moreover,
Fmax is the force (N) measured at the
load cell, L is the gauge length of the
specimen (m), I is the specimen’s

second moment of area (m4
), and ymax
(m) is the distance from the presumed
neutral plane of bending (transverse
center of specimen) and the lateralmost
fibers of the specimen.
In blacktip sharks, the E′ and E″
values were of greater magnitude
( p < 0.05) than those of bonnethead
sharks (Figure 4). In both species,
E′ increased towards the tail, an effect
that is amplified at higher values of κ,
as indicated by a significant (p < 0.05)
interaction term. The significance of
the variation in E′ and E″ was determined
using ANOVA, with species,
position, and κ as main effects ( JMP
8.0.2., SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
Since the data blacktip and bonnethead
sharks were taken at a single amplitude
of strain rate (2.0 mm s−1
), we
sought additional information about
how E′ and E″ vary with changes in
strain rate. We also wanted to test the
hypothesis that the intervertebral capsule,
which contains liquid under
above-ambient pressure, uses its internal
fluid pressure to alter the apparent
E′ and E″ of the vertebral column. Because
blacktip and bonnethead sharks
were not available for these tests,
spiny dogfish, Squalus acanthias, were
used. Fresh 10-vertebrae segments
were removed from the region of the
first dorsal fin in three dogfish. Each
segment was pressure-clamped at the
terminal vertebrae and end-loaded
with bending moments, M (for experimental
configuration, see Long et al.,
2011). The bending motion was delivered
via moment arms attached to a
single-axis linear actuator using an
MTS model Tytron 250 (Eden Prairie,
MN) and a 50-N load cell. To test the
effects of both f and κ on E′ and E″,
each segment was bent sinusoidally at
each combination of five f values and
three κ values. In addition, to test the
effects of the integrity of the fluid-filled
intervertebral joint capsule on E′ and
E″, we repeated this suite of tests
after (a) puncturing a single joint capsule
located in the middle of the segment
and (b) puncturing three joint
capsules, including the first one punctured
and two adjoining capsules.
Increases in f increased only E′
( p < 0.05) while increases in κ
increased both E′ and E″ (Figure 5).
The only significant effect of puncturing
the intervertebral capsule was
when three capsules were punctured,
and even then only E″ increased. The

significance of the variation in E′ and
E″ was determined using ANCOVA,
with puncture, f, and κ as main effects
and individual as the covariate ( JMP
8.0.2., SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
In summary, the vertebral columns
of sharks have mechanical properties
that are highly variable. As species
and anatomical position change, so,
too, do E′ and E″. Within a given vertebral
segment, the apparent storage
modulus, E′, and the apparent loss
modulus, E″, can be altered by the
bending that they undergo. Increasing
the segment’s curvature, κ, increases
both E′and E″; increasing the segment’s
frequency of bending, f, increases the
E′. Knowing the mechanical behavior
of shark vertebral columns under realistic
bending conditions creates specifi-
cations for BVCs.
Designing BVCs
To begin to understand how to
control the mechanical behavior of
BVCs, we built two classes of sharkinspired
BVC: (1) BVC with variable
cone angle, Ξ (BVCΞ): vertebrae
were created with variable Ξ and the
BVC had constant joint length, j,
and (2) BVC with variable joint length,
j (BVCj
): vertebrae were created with
a constant Ξ and the BVC had variable
j. In addition to exploring the effects
of the structures Ξ and j, we
also varied the amount of cross-linking
of the hydrogel material forming the
joint. Thus, we explored the BVC
“morphospace,” the variety of designs
described by three dimensions: Ξ, j,
and cross-linking. Part of this exploration
involved the challenge of making
composite structures that concatenate
flexible and rigid elements. After fabrication
and mechanical testing of both
classes of BVC, we selected a single
class, the BVCj
, for performance testing
in a tail-flapping aquatic robot.
In the BVCΞ , vertebrae were designed
in software (SolidWorks,
Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corp.,
Concord, MA) to have the following
values of Ξ: 15°, 30°, and 45° (Figure
6). These values correspond to
low, medium, and high values of Ξ
measured in sharks (see Figure 3).
The diameter, d, and axial length, c,
of the vertebrae were fixed at 1 cm
for both. The j of the column was
fixed at 0.25 cm.
Vertebrae were fabricated with a
rapid prototyper (Z-Corp, model
310), which produced a porous, plaster
part that was subsequently infiltrated
with cyanoacrylate (EZ bond
5cps, K&R International, Diamond
Bar, CA). This process yielded vertebrae
with mean compressive moduli,
E (MPa) of 43, 50, and 61 for vertebrae
with values of Ξ at 15°, 30°,
and 45°, respectively. These values of
E are within the range measured for
shark vertebrae (Porter et al., 2006).
Vertebrae of a given Ξ were assembled
into a BVCΞ in two stages. First,
seven vertebrae were linked together,
spaced at the fixed j, with eight horse
hairs (E in tension of 900 MPa)
arrayed axially and affixed to the
outer circumference of the vertebrae.
These horse hairs served as first

approximations of the intervertebral
ligaments found in the vertebral columns
of sharks. Second, a 10% porcine
gelatin solution was injected in
between the vertebrae; the gelatin was
solidified at 4° C. Once solidified, each
BVCΞ was then subjected to one
of three fixation treatments: 0, 1%,
or 5 % glutaraldehyde, a chemical
agent that cross-links the collagen in
the hydrogel. A total of nine different
types of BVCΞ were produced, with
each possible pairwise combination of
Ξ and glutaraldehyde concentration.
In the BVCj, vertebrae were designed
to have a Ξ of 90°, which created
ring-shaped vertebrae (Figure 7).
The d and c of the vertebrae were
fixed at 0.5 and 1.0 cm, respectively.
The overall length of the BVCj was
fixed at 8.4 cm. As the number of
nonterminal vertebrae were varied
from 0 to 11, j varied from 720 to
0.5 mm. These values of j created a
range that extended below and above
the range of j measured in sharks (see
Figure 3).
Vertebrae were milled from
Delrin™, a polyoxymethylene thermoplastic.
Delrin has a compressive E
of 3.1 GPa (Delrin Design Guide,
Module III, from DuPont), which
lies in the middle of the range of
E values reported for shark vertebrae
(Porter et al., 2006).
The ring vertebrae had an inner diameter
of 0.8 cm, which matched the
outer diameter of hydrogels made from
10% porcine gelatin fixed in 2.5%
glutaraldehyde (Long et al., 2006).
Vertebrae were slid onto the hydrogel,
spaced evenly at the desired j, and af-
fixed to the hydrogel with cyanoacrylate
adhesive. A total of 12 different
types of BVCj were produced, one
type for each of the 12 different values
of j. Three replicates of each type were
produced and tested. Please note that
in the BVCj horse hairs were omitted
because at all but the smallest values
of j, the hairs cut into the hydrogel during
bending.
Mechanical Properties
of BVCs
The E′ and E″ of the BVCs were
measured in two different kinds of
sinusoidal bending test, which corresponded
to the tests performed on
sharks’ vertebral columns. In the
BVCΞ, 3-point bending tests were
conducted in a manner identical with
those on the blacktip and bonnethead
sharks. In the BVCj, end-loaded bending
tests were conducted in a manner
identical with those on the spiny dog-
fish sharks. The E′ and E″ data for the
BVCj have been analyzed previously
(Long et al., 2011). In the analysis
here, the data have been reanalyzed
to calculate the mechanical work required
to bend the BVCj and the mechanical
work recovered as recoil.
In the BVCΞ , both E′ and E″ increased
as the glutaraldehyde concentration
increased, E′ and E″ decreased
as the Ξ increased, and E′ increased
and E″ decreased as κ increased (Figure
8). The significance of the variation
in E′ and E″ was determined
using ANOVA, with glutaraldehyde
concentration, Ξ, and κ. as main
effects ( JMP 8.0.2., SAS Institute,
Cary, NC).

Compared to the mechanical properties
of shark vertebral columns, the
BVCΞ have values of E′ that have a
wider range, overlapping the lower
values and exceeding the sharks’ higher
values by an order of magnitude (compare
Figures 8 and 4). In contrast, the
E″ values of the BVCΞ overlap only
with those of the bonnethead shark;
the BVCΞ has much lower values of
E″ than either the blacktip or spiny
dogfish shark. Moreover, the E′ for
BVCΞ decreases as κ increases; we
measured the opposite trend in sharks
(see Figures 4 and 5). Hence, the
BVCΞ is not a good biological model
in this sense. Our hypothesis as to the
source of this strain softening is that
the horse hairs force the column to
bend primarily by compression, rather
than by a combination of tension and
compression.
In the BVCj, both E′ and E″ decreased
nonlinearly as j increased
(Figure 9). Compared to the mechanical
properties of dogfish vertebral
columns, the BVCj span a nearly identical
range of E′ and E″ values. The
greatest sensitivity to changes in j occurred
at the smallest values of j (Figure
9) in the region that corresponds
to the j measured in the vertebral columns
of sharks (Figure 3). In data
shown elsewhere (Long et al., 2011),
E ′ and E ″ of the BVCj increased
with increasing κ, just as in sharks
(see Figure 5 herein). Moreover the E′
increased with increasing f, as likewise
seen in sharks (Figure 5).
The mechanical work to bend the
BVCj increased with increasing κ and
increasing E′ (Figure 9). The mechanical
work recovered as elastic recoil,
Wrecoil , is a function of the resilience,
R, which, over all the testing
conditions and sizes of joints, averaged
76%.
BVCs in Aquatic Vehicles
The flexible skeletons of sharks and
fish are inspiring the design of novel
propulsive systems and aquatic vehicles
(for review, see Fish, 2006; Long,
2007, 2011). Fins with life-like flexibility
have been built to propel a 0.7 m
long robotic turtle (Long et al., 2006)
and a 0.4 m long robotic knife-
fish (Curet et al., 2011). Bodies with
life-like flexibility have been built to

propel a 0.7-m long robotic electric
ray (Krishnamurthy et al., 2010),
a 0.5-m long robotic trout (Kruusmaa
et al., 2011), a 0.12-m long mechanical
sunfish (McHenry et al., 1995),
and a 0.5-m long mechanical pickerel
(Conte et al., 2010). Of these
self-propelled aquatic vehicles, only
the mechanical pickerel has anything
resembling a vertebral column:
a piece of spring steel designed to
release mechanical work to power
accelerations.
The BVCj presented here was invented
to propel a surface swimming,
0.3-m long tadpole robot (Long
et al., 2006; Doorly et al., 2009),
known as Tadro4 (Figure 10). BVCj
were attached to a servo motor that
created a sinusoidally varying pitching
motion of a tail. That pitch bent the
BVCj, creating a bending moment
that propagated down the length of
the BVCj in a traveling wave that, in
turn, oscillated the terminal caudal
fin. In this configuration, without
distributed muscles, the BVCj acts
as both a transmission system, transferring
momentum from the servo motor
to the caudal fin, and as a propeller,
directly transferring momentum to
the surrounding fluid.
Since Tadro4 was built to behave
reactively, with sensorimotor feedback
systems creating foraging and predator
avoidance, we needed a version that
could be programmed to swim straight
using a constant flapping frequency of
the tail, f, and lateral amplitude of the
caudal fin. That modified version of
Tadro4 was called MARMT (Mobile
Autonomous Robot for Mechanical
Testing), and it had a hull length of
17 cm and a tail length of 10 cm
(Long et al., 2011).
Outfitted with a given BVCj,
MARMT’s steady swimming performance
was measured as swimming

speed, U, and stride length, the slope
of the line of U regressed onto f,
which measures the distance the
robot travels over one period of the
flapping tail (Figure 11). As f increased
for any BVCj
, so, too, did the U. The
BVCj with greater values of E′ produced
a more rapid increase in U,
over the same range of change in f,
compared to BVCj
, with smaller values
of E′ (Figure 11, top panel). The stride
length of MARMT increased initially,
doubling as E′ doubled, before tapering
off.
When the BVCj operates in the
flapping tail, MARMT’s swimming
performance is clearly linked to the
mechanical properties of the BVCj, E′
in the case shown here. Those mechanical
properties are, in turn, under
the control of the structure of the
BVCj. Thus these experiments, taken
together, demonstrate the functional
relationship between the structure of
the BVCj and the performance of a
self-propelled aquatic robot.
Summary
Using the morphology and mechanical
properties of the vertebral
columns of sharks as our biological
target, we built and tested a series of
BVC. The mechanical behavior of
the BVCs, measured by the storage
and loss moduli over a range of bending
frequencies and curvatures, can be
altered by changing (1) the material
properties of the hydrogel that makes
up the intervertebral joint, (2) the
length of the intervertebral joint, or
(3) the shape of the vertebrae. BVCs
are sufficient to function as propulsive
elements in swimming aquatic robots:
in Tadro4 and MARMT the
BVC converts a simple pitch oscillation
from a servo motor into a wave
of bending that drives the caudal fin
laterally.
Having identified variables that in-
fluence the mechanical behavior of
BVCs, we offer a few observations for
those wishing to build jointed, flexible
biomimetic skeletons for use in flexible,
flapping propulsive systems:
(1) Design of biomimetic systems:
Engineered systems that are much

simpler than the targeted biological
system can match and extend
the targeted range of mechanical
behaviors.
(2) Control of mechanical properties:
The spacing of rigid elements
in a flexible matrix is more important
than the shape of the rigid elements
or the material properties of
the flexible material.
(3) Control of reconfiguration: Because
of the strain- and strain-ratedependence
of viscoelastic materials,
no passive, flexible propulsive system,
if its E′ and E″ matches that
of the vertebral column of sharks,
will produce constant motions over
a wide range of motor inputs.
This work is a straight-forward example
of one method of biomimetic
design (Fish, 2006; Long, 2007):
describe, test, build, and test. Start
by identifying a specific operational
context—aquatic undulatory propulsion
in this case. Then describe,
quantitatively, the biological system’s
functional morphology. Next, test
the morphology’s mechanical behavior
under physiologically relevant testing
conditions. Finally, build and test
simple biomimetic models of the system
that change just a single structural
variable over a wide range. Repeat this
process with different variables, ceteris
paribus, until the designer knows
which variables permit the natural system
and its operational range to be
mimicked or extended in biomimetic
form.

INTRODUCTION
Filter-feeding elasmobranchs are a highly migratory and largebodied
group of fishes; these combined factors make it difficult to
investigate their prey capture mechanisms in a laboratory setting or
in situ. This type of information is important, however, because the
size and type of prey that are filtered are often a determinant of
distribution in these poorly known fishes (Sims and Quayle, 1998;
Sims, 1999). Furthermore, prey capture and food preference in
pelagic elasmobranchs represent foundational data for models that
predict migratory patterns and are used to assess and maintain wellmanaged
fisheries stocks, especially in areas where these species
are harvested heavily with little regulation (Colman, 1997; Dewar,
2002; Stevens, 2007; Dewar et al., 2008).
Filter-feeding fishes consume vast numbers of tiny (5–3000m)
prey by passing immense quantities of water through their
oropharyngeal cavity (Sanderson et al., 1994; Cheer et al., 2001;
Friedland et al., 2006; Smith and Sanderson, 2007). The mechanics
of cartilaginous filtration are likely similar to that of smaller ram
filter-feeding fishes: swimming forward with an open mouth,
ingesting food particles and expelling water out of the gill openings.
Food particles may be trapped on gill rakers and transported to the
esophagus. Alternatively, food particles might be entrained and
concentrated without ever contacting the gill rakers. Using
invertebrate filter feeders as a model system, Rubenstein and Koehl
(Rubenstein and Koehl, 1977) and later LaBarbera (LaBarbera,
1984) and Shimeta and Jumars (Shimeta and Jumars, 1991)
described five basic mechanisms by which particles ranging in size
from 10–7 to 10–1 cm can be passively intercepted by a fibrous
biological filter: (1) sieve filtration, (2) direct interception, (3) inertial
impaction, (4) gravitational deposition and (5) diffusion deposition.
In sieve filtration, particles that are larger than the pore size of
the filter cannot pass through the mesh and are retained, whereas
particles smaller than the pore size pass through (Fig. 1A)
(LaBarbera, 1984). In industrial dead-end sieving, the filtering
medium is positioned to lay perpendicular to the fluid streamlines,
causing particle deposition to occur either along the filter’s surface
or as the fluid moves through the filtering element (Sibanda et al.,
2001). It had been assumed that filtering fishes sieve their planktonic
prey, but this notion was refuted by a gut content study showing
prey sizes smaller than the distance between gill rakers (Langeland
and Nøst, 1995). In the remaining mechanisms of filtration, particles
smaller than the filter’s pore size are captured by direct contact with
the filtering element (LaBarbera, 1984; Shimeta and Jumars, 1991).
Direct interception is the most common form of particle capture
among marine invertebrate filter feeders (Rubenstein and Koehl,
1977). This occurs when a neutrally buoyant particle following a
streamline comes within one particle radius of a filtering fiber, where
it adheres to mucus or some other adhesive surface. Conversely, in

inertial impaction, a sharp turn in the fluid streamline causes a
negatively buoyant particle to leave the streamline and impact a
filtering surface (Rubenstein and Koehl, 1977). Gravitational
deposition is similar to inertial impaction except that particles are
not separated from the fluid by a sharp acceleration of the streamline,
but rather by a constant gravitational force (Rubenstein and Koehl,
1977; LaBarbera, 1984; Shimeta and Jumars, 1991). Finally, in
diffusion deposition, very small particles deviate from the
streamlines because of random Brownian motion (Rubenstein and
Koehl, 1977; LaBarbera, 1984; Shimeta and Jumars, 1991). This
method captures particles smaller than those that are important for
ram filter-feeding organisms.
Fishes filter feed at higher Reynolds numbers than invertebrates,
and two additional methods should be considered: cross-flow
filtration and vortex filtration. Industrial cross-flow filtration takes
advantage of the shear generated by fluid flow parallel to the surface
of a filter to clear the filter mesh of trapped particles and concentrate
them at the end of the filter chamber (Bott et al., 2000; Sibanda et
al., 2001). This has been hypothesized to work in some filter-feeding
fishes when ingested food particles do not contact the gill rakers;
instead, they travel parallel to the surface, eventually concentrating
near the esophageal opening (Fig.1B) (Brainerd, 2001; Sanderson
et al., 2001; Callan and Sanderson, 2003). The final method of
filtration that should be considered is vortex or hydrocyclone
filtration (Fig.1C). In this case, water and food particles would enter
through the mouth into a bilaterally symmetrical vortex near the
internal gill openings. Water would then exit out the gill slits and
food particles would be collected near the esophagus or resuspended
inside the buccal cavity, increasing the chances of collision with
sticky surfaces near the esophageal opening. The mechanics behind
this are best appreciated by an analogy to a common household
vacuum. Some bagless models use vortex filtration where dirt-laden
air is entrained in a vortical flow inside a cylindrical or conical
chamber. The rotation of the fluid establishes a radial pressure
gradient exactly sufficient to maintain a circular trajectory for a
neutrally buoyant particle. However, this pressure gradient is
insufficient to maintain a circular trajectory for negatively buoyant
particles, which subsequently accumulate near the periphery
(Trakumas et al., 2001). The densest and largest particles will be
expelled early in the cyclone whereas the smaller and less dense
particles will only be expelled with a narrowing vortex. The clean
air then passes back through the center of the vortex and exits out
the top of the cylinder.
We faced an interesting challenge – a range of possible filtration
types with associated differences in prey capture mechanisms and
efficiencies and a set of fishes that is both morphologically diverse
and experimentally intractable. We suggest that simple physical
models are the best routes to investigate an initial set of predictions
about filtration efficiency and prey size selectivity. We therefore
tested a model of the open mouth of a ram-filtering fish that samples
particles both from a simulated esophagus and from a set of
simulated gill slits equipped with gill rakers. We expected this model
to give us qualitative insight into the effect of variation in
morphological (e.g. gill slit number, size, angle and buccal length)
and physiological (e.g. flow velocity) parameters on efficiency and
selectivity.
Our goals in this study were to: (1) show that a simplistic physical
model loosely based on a filter-feeding elasmobranch allowed us
to measure trends in size selectivity and efficiency of particle
capture; (2) determine the effect of changing swimming speed on
the size distribution of captured particles; (3) determine the effect
of morphological variation, including variation in gill slit number,
gill slit orientation, gill permeability and buccal depth, on the size
distribution of captured particles; (4) test the relative importance of
the gill rakers and the esophagus in particle capture; and (5) use
measurements and inferred swimming speeds from neonatal whale
sharks to predict their ability to filter different sized prey items from
the water column.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Anatomy of the filtration system
Four neonatal whale sharks, Rhincodon typus (Smith 1828), were
obtained from the Marine Vertebrate Collection at Scripps Institute
of Oceanography (La Jolla, CA, USA). We measured each shark’s
total length (TL), fork length (FL), gill width when the gill opening
was fully stretched, gill height, distance from the opening of one
gill slit to the next, mouth height, mouth width and total distance
from the leading edge of the mouth to the esophageal sphincter
(orophanyngeal distance). We also measured the distance between
the gill rakers, which we refer to as pore size. Gill width, gill height
and distance between gills were expressed in order from gill 1
(closest to the mouth) to gill 5. The four neonatal whale sharks
ranged in size from 533–591mm TL and 439–468mm FL (Table1).
It is important to note that the simplistic model is only loosely based
on the anatomy of the neonatal whale sharks. The model’s purpose
is to understand how differing fish morphologies affect filtration
efficiency and size selectivity. To accurately predict the prey of
neonatal whale sharks, we would suggest using a model that more
closely resembles this fish, e.g. a three-dimensional rapid prototyped
model based on computed tomography scans.
Predicting swimming speed
To determine the mean swimming speed of neonatal whale sharks,
we compared log-transformed length data from measured whale
sharks (TL or FL) with log-transformed mean swimming speeds of
both sharks and bony fishes compiled from published literature (see

supplementary material TableS1). The relationship between fish
length and swimming speed was analyzed using linear regression
(SPSS Statistics 16, IBM, Somers, NY, USA). It is important to
note that adult filter-feeding sharks appear to swim at slower speeds
[<0.1body lengths (BL)s–1] than other sharks and bony fishes.
However, because swimming speeds have never been measured on
neonatal whale sharks, we based our predictions on the relationship
between an organism’s size and known swimming speeds, not on
those of adult filter-feeding sharks.
Filtration models
To estimate the effects on filtration efficiency from individual
parameters, we constructed models of a ram suspension-feeding fish
roughly based on morphological measurements of neonatal whale
sharks (photos of ram feeding adult whale sharks are available in
supplementary material FigsS1–S3). Our simple cylindrical models
were created from 1l soda bottles with the bottom cut off so that
the mouth of our model had an 8.5cm diameter. A cylindrical model
was selected over a conical model based on both our observations
of filter-feeding adult whale sharks in the Yucatan and observations
of ram filter-feeding bony fishes by Cheer et al. (Cheer et al., 2001),
who noted that gill arch abduction during ram feeding resulted in
the oral cavity of the fish becoming more cylindrical in appearance.
The length of the bottles was 23.0cm including the neck of the bottle
and 19.5cm without the neck. We plugged the neck of the bottle
with a rubber stopper to simulate a closed esophageal sphincter. A
4mm diameter tube was inserted through the stopper so the leading
edge was exposed to the posterior buccal cavity. The end of the
tubing outside of the bottle was connected to a peristaltic pump to
simulate particle ingestion through the tubing at a constant rate of
8.2mlmin–1. Gill openings were cut with polyethylene mesh of
various sizes to simulate different gill resistivities.
For the experiments we started with a standard model that was
similar to the morphology measured for neonatal whale sharks, with
a few adjustments: four gill openings [which is intermediate between
bony fishes (with a singular opercular opening and five gill slits
with four gill arches on each side of the pharynx) (Harder, 1975)
and the elasmobranches (with five to seven gill slits and typically
five gill arches on each side of the pharynx) (Butler, 1999)], 90deg
gill orientation to the midline of the bottle (Cheer et al., 2001), 0.5cm
gill width, 4.5cm gill height, a buccal cavity (mouth to final gill
opening) 19.5 or 23cm from mouth to esophagus, 1000m mesh
net covering the gill openings (measured in neonatal whale sharks),
and 45cms–1 flow speed. We then systematically manipulated gill
number (one, two, three, four and five gill openings), as there is
some evidence that elasmobranch parabranchial chambers receive
varying amounts of water flow and have differing levels of oxygen
extraction (Piiper and Schumann, 1967; Ballintijn, 1972; Summers
and Ferry-Graham, 2001), gill orientation [0 and 55deg orientation
to the midline, similar to Cheer et al. (Cheer et al., 2001)] and
permeability (no mesh, 105, 200 and 2000m to represent differing
pore sizes of fishes). The 105 and 200m mesh sizes were similar
to the width between rakers measured in smaller teleosts [e.g. herring
(Gibson, 1988), singidia tilapia (Goodrich et al., 2000), and Japanese
anchovy, Pacific round herring and Japanese jack mackerel (Tanaka
et al., 2006)], and the larger mesh size (1000m) was similar to
those measured from neonatal whale sharks (Motta et al., 2010).
Gill size was increased to 1.5cm width, representing the enlarged
gill slits of the basking shark, buccal length was decreased (to 15cm
total, 12cm buccal) to test for differences in ontogeny, and flow
speed (fish swimming speed) was increased to 60cms–1 for each
gill number variation.
Adjusting each feeding parameter separately allowed us to test
our initial hypotheses about how differing morphologies affect
filtering performance. First, in all treatments, we hypothesized that
the majority of particles collected would be larger than the mesh
size if direct interception is the primary mechanism of filtration,
and a mixture of particle sizes if other mechanisms of filtration are
occurring. Second, we hypothesized that, if cross-flow filtration is
occurring, the majority of particles would be trapped close to or
inside the esophagus. Third, we hypothesized that increasing the
swimming speed should increase the filtration efficiency because
more particles will come into contact with the filtering elements if
some form of direct interception or inertial impaction is occurring.
Similarly, the filtration efficiency should also increase with smaller
mesh sizes. Fourth, we hypothesized that the slanted gill orientation
would affect the flow through the buccal cavity and, similarly, may
alter the mechanism of filtration by creating a vortex near the third
or fourth gill slit. Fifth, we hypothesized that reducing the buccal
length would result in higher flow through the buccal cavity, creating
additional turbulence near the gill slits. This additional turbulence
may result in longer periods of particle resuspension, reducing the
number of particles that come into contact with the filtering medium
and hence reducing the filtering efficiency. Finally, we hypothesized
that increasing the gill slit size would increase the surface area for
filtration, resulting in increased filtration efficiency.
The models were based on the morphology of the neonatal whale
sharks with a few key exceptions. The gill widths were measured
by adjusting the gill flaps so that they were fully open during
measurements. However, in all but one trial, we adjusted our bottle’s
parameters so that only a portion of the flap would be open during
feeding, as it is unlikely that these gill coverings are fully stretched
during a feeding event. Mouth height and width remained fixed in
all models. It is also important to note that filter-feeding sharks have
a variety of mouth shapes and heights. We chose a cylindrical version
to model, but adjustments to the mouth morphology may lead to
differences in size selectivity and filtration efficiency.
Filtration experiments
Experiments were carried out in an 802828cm recirculating
freshwater flow tank with a 422828cm working area and 260l
total volume. The model was secured in the center of the tank using
Ta

fishing line, which was anchored above the tank. To mimic plankton,
we milled 20mm poly(methylmethacrylate) cylinders to produce
slightly negatively buoyant, irregularly shaped particles (density
1.14gcm–3) ranging in size from 20 to 2000m. Density for marine
copepods has been estimated at 1.027 to 1.047gcm–3 (Knutsen et
al., 2001). The size classes chosen were based on the series of meshes
used during the experiments (e.g. 100, 200, 1000 and 2000m).
These size classes also coordinate with those typically seen in
plankton assemblages (e.g. >1000m are the largest zooplankton,
501–1000m large zooplankton and ichthyoplankton, 101–500m
microcrustaceans, 51–100m net phytoplankton and small
zooplankton, and 10–50m nanoplankton) (Moloney and Field,
1991). The use of non-spherical particles does cause some
complications in understanding how the particles react within the
flow (e.g. their orientation); however, we believe that using particles
similar to those collected during an actual feeding event gives us a
better understanding of how plankton would be captured along the
gill rakers or at the esophagus. Sixty grams of particles were added
to the flow tank and allowed to circulate for 1 h prior to
experimentation to approximate equal distributions throughout the
tank. The initial seeding density was collected and measured so that
we could compare the particle size distributions in individual
experiments with the total size distribution within the tank. The tank
was only seeded a single time during these experiments because the
particles collected during all 64 experiments comprised less than
3% of the total particles within the flume.
The model was oriented with the gape facing into the flow,
mimicking the conditions experienced by a ram filter-feeding fish
during a feeding event (Fig.2). Particles moved through the buccal
cavity and were collected either on the gill rakers or inside the
esophagus. Esophageal particles were pumped through the tube and
were captured in an external flask. The bottles remained in the flow
for a total of 3min, a period chosen because there was very little
clogging of any mesh size during this brief exposure. During
elasmobranch feeding events, raker clogging is likely prevented by
periodic swallowing of the collected plankton. At the end of the
experimental run, the leading edge of the bottle was covered and
particles that remained on the mesh and those contained in the
external flask were collected. Each experiment was replicated four
times for a total of 64 experiments.
Permeability measurements
Permeability measurements of the entire gill structures were
performed on intact neonatal whale sharks. Each shark was placed
in a 153l ice chest filled with distilled water. Water was pumped
out from the ice chest at a constant flow rate of 114mls–1 with a
Flojet Model 2100–953–115 pump (ITT Corporation, Santa Ana,
CA, USA) into a 4.41l cylindrical (441cm3
) tank, which functioned
as a manometer. Water flowed gravimetrically from the cylindrical
tank into the neonatal shark’s buccal cavity using 1.4cm diameter
plastic tubing. The tubing was inserted into a mask that sealed within
the shark’s mouth (the mask was constructed from closed-cell
polyurethane foam for larger individuals and molded silginate for
small individuals) so that the resistance of the gill openings could
be estimated by the change in water column height (pressure) in
the cylindrical tank. We calculated the resistance of a neonatal whale
shark’s buccal cavity using the equation:
where R is the resistance through the gill structure, P is the change
in pressure estimated by measuring the change in water height of
the manometer when the shark was attached to the tubing, and Q
is the flow rate. These measurements helped us to determine whether
the entire gill structure (including the gill filaments which were
ignored during these trials) had a high level of resistance to flow.
The change in pressure (P) was calculated as:
P  gh, (2)
where  is the density of water, g is gravity and h is the mean change
in height of the manometer. This equation allowed us to estimate
the permeability of the gill structures in preserved neonatal whale
sharks (N3, as one shark could not be measured) within an order
of magnitude. We compared the whale shark’s permeability
measurements with those measured from neonatal specimens of three
additional filter-feeding elasmobranchs, Mobula munkiana (N2)
and M. japonica (N1).
Reynold’s flow (Re), the ratio of inertial to viscous forces, is an
important component when attempting to quantify the effect of a
filtering element on the flow around it (Shimeta and Jumars, 1991).
Reynolds conditions at the level of the gill slits were calculated
using the standard equation:
Re  QL / A, (3)
where Q is the flow at the level of the gill slits, L is the permeability
of the mesh rakers,  is the kinematic viscosity and A is the total
area of gill openings.
Data analysis
We assessed the initial distribution of particle sizes by homogenizing
the milled (seeding) particles, collecting a large subsample
(N10,395 particles) and determining its size distribution. Following
trials, we also subsampled from the particles collected on the gill
rakers. All esophageal particles were measured because of the
relatively small number collected there. We recognize that errors
in plankton subsampling are common (van Guelpen et al., 1982);
however, these errors are reduced by increasing sampling size. Our
seeding subsampling is based on over 10,000 particles for a total
of six separate subsampling events. Experimental trial data were
based on five separate subsampling events from each replication
(or 20 subsampling events). Trial run order was chosen haphazardly
except that some 45cms–1 trials were run prior to 60cms–1 trials
and some were run after.

To ensure that particle distributions within the flume remained
similar over time (e.g. to ensure that larger particles did not settle
out of the water column), we performed a separate sampling
experiment. Once again we milled 60g of particles, subsampled from
the initial seeding density, allowed the particles to circulate within
the running flume at 45cms–1 for 1h prior to subsampling, and then
subsampled particles for 1min at 30min intervals for a total time
period of 240min (i.e. at 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210 and
240min) using a 105m net. Following the same sampling
techniques as the experiments, we compared the subsamples with
the initial seeding density distributions. We compared the
distributions, first excluding particles <100m and again excluding
<50m to reduce errors from sampling with a net that is larger than
two of our particle size categories and because we are primarily
interested in understanding how the distributions of the larger
zooplankton change, not the distributions of nanoplankton and
phytoplankton, which are not the food sources being targeted. The
different size classes of plankton were classified as follows:
1–50mvery small, 51–100msmall, 101–500mintermediate,
501–1000mlarge and >1000mvery large. We performed a
weighted linear regression of the combined percentage of
intermediate, large and very large plankton collected during
subsampling events over 240min.
All subsamples were collected, mounted on slides so that the
particles didn’t touch and analyzed for size distribution using a Zeiss
steREO Discovery V20 microscope (Carl Zeiss Imaging Gmbh,
Jena, Germany). Particles were viewed using the microscope
imaging program Axio Vision (Carl Zeiss) and photographed using
a Zeiss Axiocam HRC camera. Photos were then uploaded into NIH
Image J software (version 1.4, http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/) for analysis.
We measured the total area and the mean Feret’s diameter for each
particle in the subsamples (N10,395) of the seeding particles and
the experimental trial subsamples. Although creating a continuous
scale for these particles would give us a more in-depth visualization
of their actual size distribution, binning particles into size classes
is an easier way to visualize trends in particle capture and to infer
results by comparing the sizes of experimental particles with live
plankton size classes. The color scheme for size classes will remain
constant throughout all histograms (Figs4–8).
Filtering efficiency was determined by weighing air-dried
particles for each replication of the trials. Data are expressed as
mean efficiencies for all four trials. The weights of the collected
particles were small compared with the seeding density, so efficiency
values are expressed as per mil (‰) rather than as a percentage.
Filtration efficiency (E), or the percentage of weight-specific
particle capture per 3min trial, was calculated using the equation:
where WP is the weight of the particles either at the esophagus or
at the gill rakers and WS is the calculated total weight of the seeded
particles within the flume that are predicted to flow through the
model’s aperture. This allowed us to get a snapshot of the amount
of particles (by weight) being filtered within a relatively short
amount of time. Because we had such a small amount of particles
collected per trial, the filtering efficiencies are expressed as total
efficiency over the full 12min. Note that filtration efficiency is used
as a proxy for determining the amount of particles (by weight)
collected along the gill rakers over 12min compared with the amount
of particles available in the flume. Our filtration efficiency
calculation is similar to methods of industrial filtration efficiency,
which is expressed as {[1–(downstream concentration/upstream
E = 1000 ×
WP
WS
 , (4)
concentration)]100}. This is vastly different from filtering
efficiencies expressed in live fishes (Drenner and Mummert, 1984;
Garrido et al., 2007).
We predicted that changing the morphology (i.e. gill number,
raker permeability, buccal length, gill-slit orientation and gill size)
and/or the swimming speed of the model would affect the size
distribution of particles collected along the gill rakers; therefore,
we hypothesized that particle distributions collected during the
experiments would not be the same as the seeding distribution. To
test this hypothesis, four replicates of each version of the physical
model were compared with six replicates of the initial seeding
distribution for the five particle size categories. The various physical
models were then compared with the basic model (four gill slits,
45cms–1 flow) in the same manner to further evaluate the effects
of model alterations.
Poisson regression was used to determine whether particle
distributions differed significantly between the seeding distribution
and the various physical models, and between the basic physical
model and the other model variants. The generalized linear model
(GLM) used in comparisons was of the basic form: log(no.
particles)sourcesize category, and was analyzed using analysis
of deviance (ANODEV) (Skalski, 1996). The process of analyzing
GLMs with ANODEV is analogous to analyzing linear models with
ANOVA, but more appropriate for the replicated contingency table
design used in this study. The scale parameter (MDEVerror
SSerror/d.f.error) of the interaction term was calculated from ANODEV
results to determine the amount of dispersion. For overdispersed
data (scale parameter>1), F-statistics were calculated; in contrast,
2 statistics were considered to be more appropriate when data were
underdispersed (scale parameter<1).
RESULTS
Swimming speed
Swimming speed decreased significantly with length based on the
available teleost and elasmobranch data (r2
0.59, P<0.001; Fig.3).
This relationship was best represented by the following equation:
swimming speed(BLs–1)18.30x–0.78, where BL is body length.
Based on these results, we predict that a neonatal whale shark of

approximately 50–60cm TL swims at approximately 1BLs–1, or
45–56cms–1.
Flume seeding
We found that intermediate, large and very large particles remained
suspended in the water column throughout the full 240min trials;
therefore particle settling was negligible (r2
0.01, P0.79) (see
supplemental material Fig.S4). Our initial seeding distribution of
particle sizes in the recirculating flume was primarily composed of
intermediate particles between 101 and 500m in diameter (Fig.4A).
Seeding distributions are represented as mean (±s.d.) percentages
of the total particles that were subsampled (N10,395) from the 60g
of seeding particles.
Standard model
Our standard model collected particles in the intermediate to large
size classes (101–1000m) at the esophagus and large particles
(501–1000m) at the gill rakers (Fig. 4B,C, respectively). The Re
at the level of the filtering elements was calculated to be 1.4105
.
Compared with our seeding density, there was a threefold increase
in large particles (501–1000m) collected at the esophagus
(Fig. 4D) and a twofold increase in large particles collected at the
gill rakers (Fig. 4E), even though there were almost twice as many
101–500m particles seeded in the tank. Comparisons of the
seeding distribution treatment with the standard model for all five
seeding categories showed that the distribution of particles
collected at the gill rakers was significantly different from the
initial seeding morphology; i.e. there was a significant increase
in large and very large particles (F4,404.71, P<0.001). Specifically,
there was a twofold increase in very large (>1000m) particles
collected along the rakers. The filtration efficiency for esophageal
particles was very low (total particles collected, N135,
E0.006‰) and much higher at the rakers (E0.56‰). Because
there was very little filtration occurring in the esophagus, we will

focus on the particle capture at the gill rakers. Therefore, we
conclude that our model did not evenly collect particles from the
tank; instead, selective filtering occurred.
Gill number
The majority of particles collected in the esophagus for all
permutations of the model were in the 101–1000m size range, as
in the control model. Few particles were ‘swallowed’ at the
esophagus in any of the five treatments (N19–226 total particles
over four replicates) and the mean total efficiencies over all five
variations were extremely low (E<0.01‰ total). We did observe a
very slow-moving esophageal vortex during the trials that increased
in speed as we increased the number of gill openings. Additionally,
in the four- and five-gill trials, we noticed an increase in the number
of particles collected in the esophagus (N>100) compared with the
one-, two- and three-gill treatments. When we increased the
experimental number of gill slits to four or five, there was turbulence
near the esophageal opening; however, we could not determine
whether it was a single vortex or a pair of vortices. This turbulence
was rather slow moving during the one- and two-gill trials and
appeared to increase in speed in the trials with higher numbers of
gill slits.
Examination of the particles collected at the gill rakers showed
a shift in particle distribution from the initial seeding distribution
(Fig.5). Re for one, two, three, four and five gills were 5.6105
,
2.8105
, 1.9105
, 1.4105 and 1.1105
, respectively. In the onegill
model, the particles collected on the rakers were mostly small
(51–100m) or large to very large (>500m) and the distribution
was statistically different from that of the seeding distribution
(F4,408.16, P0.003). As we increased the number of gill openings,
the size distribution of particles collected shifted to large to very
large particles (>500m) and all permutations except three gills were
significantly different from the seeding distribution (two gills,
F4,403.67, P0.01; three gills, F4,402.40, P0.07; four gills,
F4,404.71, P0.003; and five gills, F4,4010.63, P<0.001). The
physical model transitioned from behaving as a bimodal-type filter
that collects particles in two narrow size ranges to an intermediatetype
filtration system that collects particles in a much broader size
range. Although our method precluded a quantitative examination
of the filtering performed at each gill slit, certain trends in particle
deposition were evident. During the two-gill trials, more particles
were caught in the first gill slit (the opening closest to the mouth
of the model) than in the second, whereas in the three-gill trials,
particles were captured primarily at the third gill slit. Particles
appeared evenly distributed across all slits in the four- and five-gill
trials.
Throughout all trials we collected fewer very small (≤50m) and
intermediate particles (101–500m) compared with the seeding
distribution; however, each trial also collected more large and very
large particles (>500m) than expected. Filtration efficiency
decreased during the first three trials and then increased during the
four- and five-gill trials. The total efficiencies from each trial were
as follows: one gill, 0.34‰; two gills, 0.25‰; three gills, 0.11‰;
four gills, 0.56‰; and five gills, 0.52‰.
Comparisons of the standard model with the one-, two-, threeand
five-gill trials showed that the distributions from all but the
two-gill permutation were significantly different from the standard
model (one gill, F4,306.71, P0.001; two gills, F4,301.65, P0.19;
three gills, F4,307.02, P0.004; five gills, d.f.4, 2
46.28,
P<0.001). The distributions of small and intermediate particles were
similar to those in the standard model except there was a 20%
increase in intermediate particles in the two-gill permutation. The
proportion of large particles was approximately 11% less than the
standard model in the two- and three-gill trials.
Change in speed
The total number of particles collected at the esophagus and at the
gill rakers was more numerous at a flow speed of 60cms
–1. There
was a more even distribution of particle sizes both at the esophagus
and at the gill rakers (Fig.6) compared with the standard model. Re
at 60cms
–1 were as follows for one-, two-, three-, four- and five-gill
trials: 7.4105
, 3.7105
, 2.5105
, 1.9105 and 1.5105
,
respectively. During these trials, increasing the number of gill slits
to five resulted in smaller particles collected on the rakers and, in all
but the five-gill trials, resulted in distributions that were significantly
different from those of the seeding density (one gill, d.f.4, 2
6.60,
P<0.001; two gills, d.f.4, 2
5.74, P<0.001; three gills, F4,408.99,
P<0.001; four gills, F4,405.71, P<0.001, five gills, F4,401.97,
P0.88). Trials with fewer gill openings collected particles primarily
in the intermediate to large size range (101–1000m). We noticed
the same basic trends in the 45cms
–1 trials (e.g. one-gill trials picked
up a lot of particles within 10 to 20s) and once again the speed of
the esophageal vortex or vortices was much faster in the four- and
five-gill permutations. More large and very large particles were
collected compared with the seeding distribution.
At the higher speed, filtering efficiency did not increase with the
number of gill slits. The 60cms–1 efficiencies were all lower than
the corresponding 45cms
–1 treatments (one gill, E0.16‰; two gills,
E0.04‰; three gills, E0.02‰; four gills, E0.05‰; five gills,
E0.04‰).
The distribution of particles from all of the increased speed trials
except the one-gill trial differed significantly from the standard
≤50 μm

model (one gill, F4,302.63, P0.621; two gills, F4,3031.01,
P<0.001; three gills, F4,303.75, P0.01; four gills, F4,305.65,
P0.002; five gills, F4,3016.69, P<0.001). There was an
approximately 10% increase in very small particles during the fivegill
trial compared with the standard model, and the five-gill trials
also collected a higher proportion of small particles (14%) compared
with the standard model. There was also a higher proportion of the
large particles collected in the one-gill trials (~11%) compared with
the standard model. Finally, there was a smaller proportion of very
large particles collected in each of the 60cms
–1 trials, with the largest
difference in the one-gill trials (~14% less than the standard).
Gill orientation
Adjusting the gill orientation did not change the distribution of
particles collected at the esophagus; however, there was a shift from
a band-pass-type filter in the 90deg orientation to a notch-type filter
in the 55deg orientation at the gill rakers (Fig.7A), although the
Re did not change. Particles collected in the 55deg orientation were
primarily very small (<50m) or very large (>1000m) and the
raker distributions were significantly different from the seeding
distributions (F4,406.04, P<0.001). There was no noticeable increase
in turbulence near the gill slits with this change in gill orientation;
however, particle capture occurred primarily along the lower portion
of the third and fourth gill openings. The total filtration efficiency
for the 55deg trials (0.12‰) was much lower than for the 90deg
trials (0.56‰). The distribution of particles in the 55deg orientation
model differed significantly from the standard model (F4,3017.33,
P<0.001). There was an increase in very small particles collected
(~18%) and a decrease in the proportion of intermediate and large
particles (~10 and 21% decrease, respectively) compared with the
standard morphology, resulting in a more even distribution of
particles.
Oropharyngeal cavity
A shortened oropharyngeal cavity did not affect the size distribution
of particles collected in the esophagus. Particles collected along the
rakers were primarily very small (≤50m) or large to very large
(>501m), and the distribution was significantly different from the
seeding density distribution (F4,404.28, P<0.001) (Fig.7B). The
shortened morphology resulted in an increased vorticity inside the
buccal cavity, as expected; however, we did not predict that there
would also be an increased rate of particle ejection out of the leading
edge of the model. The total filtering efficiency (0.12‰) was much
lower relative to that in the longer buccal cavity model (0.56‰).
The distribution of particles in the shortened buccal model differed
significantly from the standard model (F4,304.72, P0.004). There
was a slight increase in the proportion of very small particles (~8%)
compared with the standard model and the total distribution of
particles collected was more even across size classes.
Increased gill width
An increased gill width decreased the relative contribution of very
small particles that were collected in the esophagus from 12 to 3%.
The particles collected at the gill rakers were primarily very small to
small (≤100m) or very large (>1000m) and the particle distributions
along the rakers were significantly different from the initial seeding
distributions (F4,403.57, P<0.001) (Fig.7C). Re were 4.7104 in all
trials. Filtration efficiency did not increase with increased gill size
(E0.21‰). The distribution of particles in the increased gill model
differed significantly from the standard model (F4,3014.09, P<0.001).
There was an increase in the proportion of small particles (~25%)
and a decrease in intermediate and large particles (~15 and 22%,
respectively) compared with the standard model.
Permeability
Adjustments to gill raker permeability did not affect the distribution
of particles collected at the esophagus. Particles collected at the
esophagus were in the large size range (501–1000m) during all
trials. The distributions of particles collected in the esophagus using
the 105 and 200m mesh were similar to those collected using the
1000m mesh (mostly 100–1000m particles). The amount of
particles collected at the esophagus was low compared with that
collected along the gill rakers, ranging from a total of 10 particles
collected over four replicates in the absence of gill rakers to a total
of 135 particles collected over four replicates in the 1000m mesh
trials. During the 1000m mesh trials we noticed the presence of
turbulence near the esophageal opening; however, we could not
determine whether this was a bilaterally symmetric vortex or a single
esophageal vortex.
Particles collected along the gill rakers at increasing pore sizes
displayed a shift in size distribution. At low permeability (small
pore size, 105m) particles were equally distributed, except in the
small (51–100m) category (105m, F4,406.22, P<0.001; Fig.8A),
and Re was 1.4103
. During these trials, particles were heavily
deposited within 10–20s of the beginning of each trial. We collected
the most particles off the gill rakers during the 105m trials;
however, there were almost no particles collected in the esophagus
(N30). Particle deposition appeared to occur only on the first three
gill slits and the fourth gill slit rarely had many particles. In the
200m mesh trials there was a shift in the particle distribution to
intermediate to large particles (101–1000m; F4,406.88, P<0.001;
Fig.8B); Re was 2.8103
. Again, during these trials almost no
particles were collected in the esophagus (N33 total particles over
four replicates) and particle capture was equal across all gill slits.
During the 1000m mesh trials, capture occurred only along the
third and fourth gill slits. Once again primarily large to very large
particles were collected (>500m; F4,404.71, P0.003), although
the total distribution of all particle sizes was more uniform compared
with the 200m mesh trials. We did not collect any particles during
the no-mesh trials (Re2.8105
) or the 2000m mesh trials
(Re2.5106
). Particles collected in all trials were greater in
abundance than expected for the large to very large particle sizes
(>500m) and lower than expected for the small particle sizes
(<51m). We saw an increase in the proportion of large particles
collected compared with the seeding distribution. As expected, the
lowest permeability measurements had the highest filtration
efficiency of all of the trials (E1.33‰ for 105m and 0.85‰ for
200m). The distribution of particles in the 100m mesh trials
differed significantly from that of the standard model (F4,307.427,
P<0.001) whereas the distribution in the 200m trials did not
(F4,301.67, P0.18). There was a decrease in intermediate particles
in the 105m trials (~10%) compared with the standard model.
Permeability measurements of the three neonatal whale sharks
(mean TL563±23.8mm) showed very little extrinsic resistance
through their buccal cavities (R0.91–6.31Paml–1 s–1) when flow
rate was measured to be constant at 114mls–1 (Table2). These
resistance measurements were similar to those of other small filterfeeding
elasmobranchs (M. japonica0.99 Paml–1 s–1, Mobula
munkiana specimen 16.36Paml–1 s–1, M. munkiana specimen
22.27Paml–1 s–1; Table 2). The calculated pressure head across the
filtering apparatus ranged from 106.19 to 171.86Pa, similar to
pressure heads calculated by Motta et al. for adult whale sharks
(113Pa) (Motta et al., 2010).
DISCUSSION
Gill number and swimming speed played major roles in the
distribution of particle sizes collected on the gill rakers. This was
unexpected as we predicted that the main form of filtration would
be dead-end sieving, which should only collect particles larger than
the filter pore size. The particles were primarily caught along the
gill rakers, which leads us to believe that inertial impaction and
gravitational deposition were the prominent filtering mechanisms
during these trials, though we cannot rule out the possibility that
cyclone filtration was occurring to some degree, as we did document
a bilaterally symmetrical vortex near the slits in many of the trials.
In several cases we quantified a shift from a bimodal-type filter to
an intermediate-type filter or vice versa. For example, when we
adjusted the number of gill openings from one to five, we saw a
shift from a bimodal filter (where primarily 51–100m particles
and >500m particles were filtered) to a filter where only
intermediate and large particles were filtered. Surprisingly, we saw
this same trend at increased speeds (bimodal distribution to
intermediate/large size ranges) except at the five-gill permutation
(60cms–1), where mostly small particles were caught. This switch
to smaller particles collected was unexpected, as higher velocity
flow through the oropharyngeal cavity should have increased the
contact rate of the most numerous particles in the flow chamber
(101–500m particles) and, hence, the number of intermediate
particles filtered.
Theoretical predictions of an organism’s optimized swimming
speeds while feeding suggest that the animals should accelerate to
maximize the number of prey encountered when feeding in lowdensity
plankton blooms and decelerate when feeding in a highdensity
plankton bloom (Ware, 1978; Sims, 2000). During the fivegill
trial, we observed that the increase in swimming speed also
increased the turbulence near the gill openings within the
oropharyngeal cavity. More large particles appeared to remain
suspended in the turbulent esophageal vortex rather than settling
out on the sieve, providing some evidence that the particles may
have experienced some degree of cross-flow filtration. This indicates
that ram filter feeders, using hydrosol filtration or a combination of
inertial impaction and gravitational deposition, should maintain a
slower swimming speed regardless of the plankton density if they
are targeting larger prey and increase their swimming speed if
targeting smaller prey. Organisms primarily utilizing cross-flow or
vortex filtration would likely swim at increased speeds to concentrate
larger prey in the esophageal vortex prior to swallowing.
Adjustments to the gill morphology resulted in a shift in the
particle distributions at the gill rakers from intermediate-type
filtration in our control group (501–1000m particles collected) to
bimodal-type filtration. It is not surprising that increasing the size
of the gill slits also resulted in an increased filtering efficiency, as
increasing the volume of particle-laden water through this structure
should result in increased opportunities for filtration. These large
gills would not be necessary in pump suspension- or engulfmentfeeding
fishes, which filter by first creating a suction force to entrain
zooplankton-rich water and then subsequently close their mouths
to force this water over the gill rakers. This point is illustrated nicely
by comparing the smaller gill morphology of a megamouth shark,
Megachasma pelagios, which has been hypothesized to use an
engulfment feeding strategy (Nakaya et al., 2008), with that of the
large-gilled basking sharks (Bigelow and Schroeder, 1953) and
whale sharks (Colman, 1997), which use, at least in part, ram
suspension feeding. Though we had predicted that ram filtration
efficiency would increase with gill size, we did not predict that the
particle distribution would shift to that of a planktonic specialist
without having to adjust the pore size of the filter. These findings
indicate that the morphology of the filter feeder does play a key
role in the prey size selectivity of the organism.
Perhaps the most obvious parameter affecting captured particle
distribution was gill raker permeability, or pore size, which was
reflected in our particle distributions. We expected the increased
filtration efficiency in decreased pore-size permutations (105 and
200m mesh sizes), because the likelihood of a particle contacting
the filtering element would be greatly increased relative to the 1000
and 2000m mesh sizes. Even with this increase in filtration
efficiency at smaller pore size, the greatest mean efficiency we
measured was 4.54‰. These seemingly low filtration efficiencies
are explained by examining optimal foraging theory (Stephens and
Krebs, 1986), which proposes that animals feeding in high-density
particle areas can survive well even with low filtration efficiencies,
provided that their energetic needs are being met (Shimeta and
Jumars, 1991). We would hypothesize that fishes with low filtration
efficiencies would likely feed on plankton with high caloric and/or
lipid values to meet their energetic needs.
In teleosts, the gill raker structures generally vary by the length
of the rakers and their spacing (Nelson, 1967; Bertmar and
Strömberg, 1969; Gibson, 1988; Bornbusch and Lee, 1992; van den
Berg et al., 1994; Kumari et al., 2005; Friedland et al., 2006; Vigliano
et al., 2006). However, the gill raker structures (sometimes referred
to as filtering pads) of the filtering cartilaginous fishes exhibit
substantial interspecific variation. The four basic raker morphologies
are: (1) the bristle-like gill raker structures of the basking shark,
Cetorhinus maximus; (2) the fur-like short gill rakers of megamouth
sharks, M. pelagios; (3) the widely spaced, flattened filtering pads
of whale sharks, Rhincodon typus; and (4) the rigid, leaf-like, folded
filtering structure of devil rays and mantas (Mobulidae) (Fig.9).
These differences in brachial filter morphology among
elasmobranchs may result in differences in the basic filtering
mechanics (e.g. cross flow, direct interception) and cannot be addressed using our simplistic mesh morphology. This topic would
be best addressed by determining the position of the pad within the
buccal cavity and taking an in-depth look at the microstructure of
the filtering pad. For example, we cannot evaluate whether a form
of hydrosol filtration is occurring without performing histological
techniques to determine whether a sufficient number of mucal cells
are present. Rubenstein and Koehl noted that the efficiency of a
filter can be altered by simply changing the diameter of the pore
size or the velocity of the water that passes through it (Rubenstein
and Koehl, 1977). Our model’s rakers were subjected to highvelocity
(45cms–1) flow and, when combined with a fine mesh size
(105m), we predicted that the primary method of particle collection
would likely be a form of inertial impaction sieving. As expected,
we had the greatest number of particles collected from the gill rakers
during this experiment and the particle size was similar across all
size ranges. Decreased permeability (smaller pore size) at the gill
rakers increased the evenness of the particle sizes that were
collected; however, there was no visible evidence that shear flow
was moving particles from the mesh to the esophagus. We predict
that basking sharks use this type of filtering and would need to either
periodically clear the rakers to prevent excessive clogging or
continuously transport particles through some mucous-based
mechanism. Organisms with a fine mesh size that utilize dead-end
sieving (similar to the basking shark) are likely planktonic
generalists, feeding on a wide range of particle sizes. As in industrial
dead-end sieving, the gill raker structures of organisms using sieve
filtration would project into the buccal cavity at a perpendicular
orientation to the water flow, resulting in increased filtration
efficiency along their surfaces.
The unique morphology of the whale shark’s filter pads open up
the possibility of cross-flow filtering. In whale sharks, the rakers
do not protrude into the buccal cavity. Instead, their morphology
suggests that they lay flush with the walls of the epibranchials with
sparse spacing (approximately 1000m pore size) between each gill
raker. In our experiments, the 1000m rakers collected large to very
large particles. The very small and small particles (<100m) did
not accumulate, but rather exited easily through the mesh. Adult
whale sharks appear to feed primarily through cross-flow filtration
(Motta et al., 2010). If neonates are also utilizing some form of
cross-flow filtration, we would expect that the majority of the
particles collected in the esophagus should be equal to or larger
than the pore size of the rakers. With the increased permeability of
2000m mesh, there was an increase in the size of particles that
were swallowed compared with those swallowed at less permeable
pore sizes; however, we could not verify whether cross-flow
filtration was occurring.
The model we developed allows us to determine which parameters
are important for both dead-end sieving and cross-flow filtration in
a way that is difficult to examine using computational models.
Empirical data from live ram suspension-feeding fishes is difficult to
obtain in teleosts as: (1) they are generally schooling fishes that
become agitated when separated from their conspecifics and (2) they
are typically small in size, limiting the use of endoscopy (Cheer et
al., 2001). Conversely, filter-feeding elasmobranchs are some of the
world’s largest fishes and are not easily acquired for experimental
purposes. Physical models are an inexpensive alternative to
maintaining live specimens in a laboratory and can be created by
measuring the anatomical parameters of fixed specimens from marine
vertebrate collections. By focusing on how the mechanism of filtering
changed with differing buccal anatomies, we were able to make
predictions about the feeding mechanisms and potential prey
preference of suspension-feeding fishes. Our physical model
demonstrated that the filtration efficiency and particle size distribution
collected during ram suspension feeding is intimately connected to
both an individual’s anatomy and the swimming speed of the animal.



Biomechanists, with help from Isaac
Newton and William Froude, have
developed a good understanding of
the forces involved in locomotion on solid
ground1
. Even if an animal should slip beneath
the waves and undulate into the deep there
are equations and techniques, courtesy of
Claude-Louis Navier, George Stokes and
computational fluid dynamics, that nicely
explain and predict its motion2
.
However, when an animal moves through a
granular material, predictability and theoretical
underpinning have been as elusive as seeing
a world in a grain of sand. In a paper in the
Journal of the Royal Society Interface, Maladen
and his colleagues3
 describe how they have
used a refinement of their resistive force theory
to show that a sand-swimming lizard moves
forward about as fast as it can. Their model will
allow biologists and engineers to explore locomotion
in granular solids with unprecedented
ease and speed.
Sandfish (Scincus scincus), also known as
skinks, are not fish but lizards. They are drab,
tan-coloured creatures with short, sprawling
limbs. But they have one impressive ability
—when startled, a sandfish can vanish completely
into a North African or Middle Eastern
dune in less than a second (Fig. 1). If you dig
at the spot where it vanished you will find
nothing but sand, the lizard having wriggled
away under the surface.
In earlier work using X-ray videography,
Maladen and colleagues4
 found that sandfish
move not by paddling with their legs but by
undulating their bodies from side-to-side to
swim through the sand. The sandfish throws
its body into an S-shape with an amplitude of
about 20% of its length. This sinusoidal wave
travels backwards along the body at about
twice the speed with which the animal moves
forward, amounting to a wave efficiency of
about 0.5. In their new work, the researchers
used this conclusion as a benchmark for further
studies with simulations, mathematical
models and a robotic lizard.
The behaviour of a granular material such
as sand is tricky to understand because it can
act as both a solid and a fluid. The many small
particles can flow like water but, under the
right conditions, sand can be as unyielding
as the rock from which it came. This is where
resistive force theory (RFT) comes in.
The theory was inspired by models of tiny
aquatic organisms moving in water, where
movement is constrained by the viscosity of the
fluid. In granular materials, however, it turns
out that frictional drag is more important than
viscosity, and drag values for short segments of
the submerged object are an important input
of RFT. One innovation of this work3
 is the
use of drag values derived from simulations
rather than those laboriously gathered by pulling
objects through media of differing density.
Using the simulation-derived drag values and
kinematics measured from videos, Maladen
et al.3 found that RFT predicted the wave efficiency
reasonably well, although not perfectly
An alternative to RFT is a numerical modelling
technique that takes into account the
interactions of spherical grains with each
other and with a deforming, submerged solid
shaped like a sandfish. However, simulating
sand-sized particles would take weeks
of computer time. Fortunately, sandfish are
happy to burrow in glass beads 3 millimetres
in diameter. By observing the lizards moving
through the beads, and then using the larger
particle size in the simulations, Maladen et al.
cut computing time to ‘mere’ days. The agreement
between the simulation and the lizards’
performance was better than that derived
by RFT, but the procedure was much more
time-consuming.
The advantage of both the RFT and numerical
modelling techniques is that parameters
can be varied to explore patterns and seek
optima. Initially, the most striking result was
the finding that wave efficiency continues to
rise as the animal’s body is thrown into higheramplitude
waves. But these sharp bends mean
that the sandfish covers less forward distance
with each undulation. When the forward
speed was plotted against the ratio of amplitude
to wavelength, the peak speeds occurred
at ratios ranging from 0.19 to 0.27 for the various
simulations. The authors found that the
data collected from actual lizard performance
lie at this same peak. Thus, it seems that when
fleeing from a potential predator, kinematic
efficiency takes a back seat to a speedy retreat.
Designing a biomimetic robot teaches you
as much about biology as it does about
engineering5,6. In this case, Maladen and colleagues3
 used a sand-swimming robot to determine
whether the theory, and the practice as
demonstrated by the lizard itself, could be
translated into the realm of engineering. The
robot consisted of six connected segments,
powered by servos, packed in a latex sock and
wrapped in a spandex swimsuit.
The researchers showed that the robot
is able to swim in granular media at similar
speeds to those observed in the other models
and in live organisms, but at efficiencies 30%
below the predicted maximum. By simulating
the segmented robot in the numerical model,
they determined that this discrepancy in
performance was due to the robot’s low number
of intersegmental joints. It was not until
the researchers used more than 15 segments,
creating a robot capable of forming a smoother
curve, that wave efficiency approached a
maximum. Perhaps the reason that many
sand swimmers are elongate, smooth-bodied
and small-limbed, with many vertebrae, is to
better fall into a curve without the sharp bends
that sap energy.




Sand lances (Family Ammodytidae) are a group of fishes that
employ anguilliform locomotion during pelagic swimming, and
exhibit a peculiar behavior of actively swimming into sandy
substrates as a refuge (Dick and Warner, 1982). This burrowing
behavior is associated with hibernation during the winter, daily
migrations into the sand after dark and predator avoidance
(Winslade, 1947a; Winslade, 1947b; Girsa and Danilov, 1976). The
burrowing behavior of sand lances presents a good opportunity to
investigate the mechanics of both locomotion within and transitions
between different environments.
Seawater behaves as a Newtonian fluid and will flow continuously
when a shear stress is applied, whereas a sand–water mix may act
as a non-Newtonian fluid, because of both sand–sand and
sand–water interactions. Settled wet sand is a hybrid material with
some solid and some fluid properties, and it will generally support
some shear stress. The precise mechanics of particle interaction
remains unclear, although similar ‘frictional fluid’ sand–air mixtures
have been studied (Maladen et al., 2009).
During terrestrial locomotion, snakes and other limbless
vertebrates use undulatory locomotion whereby they apply force to
discrete, non-moving points on the ground via a posteriorly
propagating wave (Gray, 1946). In the ideal case, where these points
are immobile, the animal’s propulsive undulations travel caudally
along the body, maintaining a velocity equal, though oppositely
oriented, to the animal’s forward progress (Jayne, 1986).
Consequently, all points along the axis of the body will follow the
same trajectory: the undulatory wave, which, while propagating
posteriorly along the animal’s body, will not move in a world-based
coordinate system (Jayne, 1986). We will refer to this mode of
locomotion as ‘non-slipping wave’ locomotion.
By contrast, animals using aquatic undulatory locomotion do
not have discrete push points available because they are exerting
force onto a fluid for propulsion. Because water continuously
deforms under shear stress, the water will flow as the body of an
animal pushes against it. Also, because flow results in undulatory
waves that move in a world-based coordinate system, all points
along the body’s axis will not follow the same trajectory (Grillner
and Kashin, 1976; Gillis, 1998). In this case, the undulatory waves
move posteriorly with respect to both the body and the world.
We will refer to this mode as ‘slipping wave’ locomotion. In a
study comparing the mechanics of undulatory locomotion on land
and in water, Gillis (Gillis, 1998) studied kinematic differences
in the eel, Anguilla rostrata (Lesueur 1817). Effectively, eels
traveling on land locomote using nearly non-slipping wave
locomotion (more like other terrestrial vertebrates), whereas
those same individuals engage in slipping wave locomotion in an
aquatic environment (Fig.1).

This dichotomy between the mechanics of non-slipping wave and
slipping wave locomotion raises the issue of how an animal
transitions from one medium to another, as when sand lances
transition from aquatic to subterranean locomotion. Given the higher
viscosity and heterogeneity of the sand–water mix, we hypothesize
that buried sand lances will exhibit kinematics more closely
resembling those of terrestrial snakes (i.e. we predict that they will
employ non-slipping wave locomotion). Furthermore, any portion
of the animal not buried will move with kinematics more closely
resembling those of aquatic eels (i.e. we predict that they will employ
slipping wave locomotion).
We filmed sand lances burrowing using standard high-speed video
and X-ray video to quantify their kinematics. We use these data to
qualitatively and quantitatively examine the progression of kinematic
behavior throughout the burrowing process in these fishes. Then,
we compare our findings with the available data on terrestrial snakes,
aquatic and terrestrial eels, and other animals that exhibit undulatory
locomotion. Finally, we develop a model to explain the observed
movements, and determine whether the environmental transition
happens either as a gradient [or intermediate gait (sensu AshleyRoss
and Bechtel, 2004)] or as an abrupt change in kinematics at
some critical threshold.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Specimens
Two sets of specimens were used in this project (Table1). The first
set of specimens (N10) were Pacific sand lance, Ammodytes
hexapterus (Pallas 1814), collected using a mesh bag seine off the
shoreline of San Juan Island, WA, USA. These fish were fed mysid
shrimp and maintained in tanks in a flow-through seawater system
at the Friday Harbor Laboratories (FHL), University of Washington.
All experiments with these specimens were conducted at FHL in
accordance with the University of Washington animal health and
welfare policies.
The second set of specimens (N10) was a mixture of the
American sand lance, A. americanus (DeKay 1842) and the Northern
sand lance, A. dubius (Reinhardt 1837). These fishes were caught
using a custom bottom trawl off the coasts of Rhode Island and
Massachusetts, USA. They were maintained in the Kauffman lab
at Boston University (Boston, MA, USA), on a diet of Artemia spp.
Fishes were transported to Brown University, where they were used
in cinefluoroscopy experiments. Specimens were difficult to classify
to species while alive, and so were used for experiments while alive
and then subsequently killed for species identification by lateral scale
counts. All work using these specimens was conducted in accordance
with both Brown University and Boston University animal health
and welfare policies.
The A. hexapterus individuals in the FHL dataset ranged from
66mm to 104mm standard length (SL), whereas the A. dubius and
A. americanus specimens in the Brown dataset ranged from 126 to
142mm and 105 to 123mm SL, respectively. This size difference
was not relevant to the study because comparisons between aboveand
below-ground locomotion are exclusively qualitative and all
quantitative comparisons are made within a size class. Interspecies
comparisons or scaling issues are not addressed using these datasets.
Videography
High-speed videos of the FHL specimens was used to characterize
the above-sand portion of sand lance burrowing kinematics. A highspeed
video camera (Motionscope, Redlake Imaging, Tallahassee,
FL, USA) recorded animals at 125framess–1 with an exposure time
of 2ms. The filming tank was approximately 204510cm (height
 length  width), filled with 10cm of sand with 10cm of water
above it. The camera was positioned so that activity in the tank
could be recorded in lateral view. A mirror was positioned at a 45deg
angle above the tank to provide a dorsal view using the same camera.
The filming tank was illuminated by fiber-optic and incandescent
lights. Each individual A. hexapterus was placed into the tank and
filmed while burrowing until it was completely underground. After
a 15min recovery period, each fish was removed from the substrate
and allowed to burrow again. Three to five burrowing sequences
were recorded for each of ten individuals, for a total of 36 burrowing
sequences. The clearest video sequence of each individual was used
for further analysis.
The fish studied at Brown University (Brown specimens) were
filmed using three synchronized Photron Fastcam 1024 PCI highspeed
video cameras (Intronix Imaging Technologies, Westlake
Village, CA, USA) at a frame rate of 125framess–1. Two of the
cameras were connected to retrofitted C-arm fluoroscopes
(Radiological Imaging Services, Hamburg, PA, USA) to provide
X-ray videos of burrowing behaviors in lateral and dorsoventral
views. During burrowing the fish displaced sand, thus allowing the
body to be viewed as a negative X-ray image. X-ray energies varied
somewhat between sequences, but were generally set at 20mA and
100-120kVp. The third camera was positioned to collect standard
(not X-ray) videos of the fish swimming in the water above the
sand. Aquaria of various sizes and shapes were used so that lateral
and dorsoventral X-ray and standard high-speed video images could
be obtained. Because of the X-ray density of the water and sand,
combined with the need to provide the animals with enough space
to perform natural behaviors, we were not able to collect satisfactory
lateral and dorsoventral X-ray movies simultaneously. In the end,

all of the quantitatively analyzed data were collected in oblique
lateral standard camera perspective and dorsoventral X-ray camera
perspective. The aquarium was 2020cm square and 23cm deep.
It was filled to a depth of 5cm with Arag-Alive aragonite reef sand
(Carib Sea, Inc., Fort Pierce, FL, USA), with a depth of 8cm of
water above the sand. This aquarium sand has a manufacturerspecified
grain size of 0.2–2.2mm.
Camera views and synchronization of data
The FHL dataset provided three-dimensional (3-D) kinematics for
the portion of the body that remained above ground. These 3-D data
were crucial because the above-ground portion of the studied
behavior is not planar. The Brown dataset could not resolve threedimensional
motion. However, no animals burrowed deeper than
5cm in sand, despite availability of greater depths in several trials.
Moreover, during burrowing, animals typically remained upright
(dorsal side up, ventral side down), with little deviation from
horizontal pitch. For analysis purposes, we assumed that no
dorsoventral movement occurred in burrowed animals. Following
this assumption, we used the standard video camera from the Brown
dataset to align time points of above-ground kinematics with those
from X-ray videos of below-ground kinematics. We used the
dorsoventral X-ray camera to quantify subterranean movements.
Kinematic analyses
Using a custom script in MATLAB 7.4 (MathWorks, Inc., Natick,
MA, USA), we digitized a midline for every frame of selected
sequences (N20; 10 from FHL and 10 from Brown). Each sequence
was from a different individual. FHL sequences were analyzed from
the time the nose touched the substrate (nose-touch) until the time
the tail could no longer be seen by the above-ground camera. The
FHL videos were analyzed in both lateral and dorsal views, but the
Brown X-ray videos were analyzed in dorsal view only.
For each frame of video, enough points were digitized to
accurately depict above-ground body position in each camera view.
This ranged from roughly twenty points at the beginning of a
burrowing sequence when most of the body was exposed to two
points at the end of a sequence when most of the body was
underground. Registration was accomplished by first fitting a spline
to the 2-D data from each view. The tangent of these splines in 2-
D space was used to calculate the tangent of the midline in 3-D
space. By stepping posteriorly through the midline points and
calculating the 3-D tangent of each segment, it was possible to map
the positions on one midline to positions on the second midline.
With all the positions on one midline registered to corresponding
positions on the other midline, a 50-point 3-D midline was
reconstructed. These animals have between 70 and 75 vertebrae, so
each segment of the midline spanned approximately 1.5 vertebrae.
To measure body curvature, we used each sequential point triplet
(1, 2, 3; 2, 3, 4; etc.) to define a circle, rendering 48 circles defined
at each frame. We calculated instantaneous curvature values by
taking the inverse of the radius of each circle and averaging these
values across the entire body, resulting in one measurement for each
frame. Because this metric still contained a strong noise component,
we averaged across 15 frames from each stage of burrowing for
statistical comparison (see Results for a description of these three
stages of burrowing). We tried breaking the data up into two and
three sections – i.e. one analysis of just the anterior versus posterior
half of the exposed portion of the body, and anterior, middle and
posterior thirds. Neither showed patterns of curvature changes
longitudinally within a stage, suggesting that lumping values
longitudinally is a valid approach.
Inter-dataset comparisons
The two datasets examined herein are largely non-overlapping.
Therefore, the FHL dataset is chiefly used for a qualitative description
of above-ground kinematics, with quantitative data being used to
examine differences between stages of burrowing. The Brown dataset
is used as a descriptor of below-ground kinematics, with quantitative
data comparing stages of subterranean locomotion within this dataset.
The timing variables measured in both datasets are linked by the
standard camera view, which is used to determine the time of nosetouch,
the end of the burrowing sequence and the stage divisions.
RESULTS
Above-ground kinematics
We observed a sequence of three distinct stages during burrowing
in every trial for every individual. The progression involves a sudden
increase in above-ground movements, when undulations become
more pronounced and increased in frequency. This is followed by
a sudden halt in movement, when the tail ceases undulation and
appears to glide effortlessly into the sand. In all stages undulations
that occur above ground have a slipping wave pattern. Burrowing
sequences (measured from the time of the nose touching the
substrate until the tail can no longer be seen above ground) lasted
approximately 1s. The shortest recorded burrowing event lasted
0.55s and the longest lasted 1.75s. Each of the three stages lasted
approximately one third of the sequence.

Initially, when burrowing commences, the animal uses
conventional slipping wave locomotion, in which the body continues
to undulate as if not encountering the resistance of the sand, although
the fish has already engaged the substrate. The sand lance uses these
undulations to drive its pointy, cone-shaped head into the sand
(Fig.2). This kinematic phase is qualitatively similar to swimming
observed before the nose touches the substrate, except for the lack
of head yaw, which is due to the rostrum being embedded in the
sand. We term this portion of the burrowing sequence ‘Stage 1’
(Fig.3A,D,G).
Stage 2 is characterized by more pronounced body undulations,
in which the tail often makes contact with the substrate (Fig.3B,E,H).
The body undulations also attain higher curvatures than in Stage 1
(Fig.4; P0.0028 in a paired t-test, N10). The frequencies and
amplitudes of the tail tip do not vary between Stages 1 and 2,
remaining at approximately 0.7Hz and 6cm, respectively. These
more pronounced undulations drive approximately two-thirds of the
body into the substrate.
Stage 3 is marked by a sudden halt in above-ground undulation,
and the above-ground portion of the tail typically straightens
(Fig.3C,F,I). We term the beginning of this stage ‘tail stop’.
Undulations observed during Stage 3 are less curved than those at
Stage 2 (Fig.4; P0.0008 in a paired t-test, N10). The two outliers
(marked by open circles) in Fig.4 are data for fish with their tail
bent over and resting on the sand. In both cases, the tail was no
longer undulating.
Comparison with below-ground kinematics
During Stage 1, the underground portion of the animal does not
undulate and thus enters the sand in a straight line (Fig.5A,D,G).
At the onset of Stage 2 (denoted by the increase in curvature and
amplitude in the single standard camera view), the buried portion
of the animal typically makes a 90deg lateral bend, and the head
begins traveling in a direction orthogonal to its entry trajectory
(Fig.5B,E,H). At the onset of Stage 3 (denoted by the offset of
undulations in the above-ground potion of the body in the standard

camera view), the animal makes a second lateral 90deg bend in the
opposite direction, pointing its head back in the original orientation
of movement (Fig.3C,F,I). The frequency of undulation is also
greatly reduced (Fig.5G,H,I) from that of the above-ground portions
of the body (Fig.3, same panels). Underground, Stages 2 and 3 are
indistinguishable from each other on the basis of radius of curvature
of the fish (Fig.4; P0.6222 in a paired t-test, N10) and are more
curved than above-ground portions of the body in all stages (Fig.4,
P0.001 in a standard t-test, N20). In all stages the undulations
below ground, have a non-slipping wave pattern.
Kinematic timing
Synchrony can be identified by comparing the relative timing of
kinematic events (Fig.6). Nose-touch is the principal kinematic event
of the burrowing process (we use nose-touch as the initiation point
of the burrowing sequence and the point at which the tail is
completely submerged in sand as the end of the burrowing sequence)
and is followed by the first subterranean lateral bend after a variable
delay. The second subterranean bend is likewise variable in its timing
(paired t-test of first bend versus second bend timing; P0.0001,
N10) and the tail stop is also significantly different in timing from
the first lateral bend (paired t-test, P0.0001, N10). The only
kinematic events that occur reliably in concert are the second lateral
bend and the ceasing of tail movement (paired t-test, P0.2796,
N10). These two variables always occur within 0.1s of each other,
although their relative order varies.
DISCUSSION
We have shown that sand lances exhibit different modes of
undulatory locomotion depending on the environment with which
they are in contact. Furthermore, the change in locomotor kinematics
occurs abruptly at a specific point during the burrowing process,
before which aquatic thrust, by way of the tail, is the predominant
mode of propulsion. Once enough of the body is underground, the
anterior portion of the body takes over, and the tail ceases forcegenerating
movements. While swimming, sand lances maintain the
stereotypical anguilliform mode in which the undulatory wave
travels faster posteriorly along the body than the animal itself travels
anteriorly – the hallmark of slipping wave locomotion. Once

subterranean propulsion has commenced, however, the observed
kinematics change, becoming more snake like. Similarly, eels that
leave water and travel terrestrially also locomote in a snake-like
manner (Gillis, 1998), though they do slip somewhat on any
substrate.
Aquatic locomotion and burrow initiation
In their burrowing sequence, sand lances are initially only capable
of aquatic locomotion, yet they must propel themselves into a
sand–water mix, which is more viscous and supportive of shear stress
than water. We hypothesize two adaptations for burrowing in such
a situation: (1) a pointed head with a bony projection from the
dentary and (2) behavioral increases in undulation frequency and
amplitude. Equipped with these morphological and behavioral
attributes, the sand lance is able to propel itself into the sand water
mix.
During Stages 1 and 2, the above-ground portion of sand lances
exhibit slipping wave locomotion (Fig.3, first two columns). This
is not surprising because these animals are pushing off against water,
rather than solid, non-moving points, to propel themselves forward.
In Stage 2, the increases in amplitude and frequency become evident,
indicating a more dedicated ‘push’ into the substrate. One important
way that this mode of locomotion is different from typical eel-like
locomotion is the nearly complete lack of head yaw (Fig.3G,H).
This is the result of the head being planted into the substrate and
may serve to more directly orient propulsive forces into the sand.
Once the animal is approximately two-thirds submerged in the
substrate – i.e. at the beginning of Stage 3 – it abruptly and
fundamentally changes its mode of locomotion. The previously
important undulations of the non-buried portion of the body cease,
suggesting the tail’s uselessness as a propulsive organ in the final
stage of the burrowing sequence.
Underground locomotion
Subterranean undulatory kinematics of sand lances resemble
terrestrial snake locomotion in having a non-slipping wave pattern.
During terrestrial locomotion, snakes rely on surface irregularities
in the substrate – such as pebbles, tufts of grass, or asperities in the
ground – and frictional anisotropy of the scales to push themselves
forward (Jayne, 1986; Hu et al., 2009). Some snakes are capable
of locomotion with a single peg fastened to a low-friction floor,
although having multiple points of substrate contact in a zig-zag
configuration can aid in cancellation of lateral forces, which can
allow for faster and more effective locomotion (Moon and Gans,
1998). These idealized zig-zags and the two sequential 90deg bends
observed underground in this study bear a striking resemblance to
an experimental apparatus used by Gray and Lissmann to study
snake locomotion, which is redrawn in Fig.7 (Gray and Lissmann,
1950). In the tunnel, each wall registered forces acting normal to
it. Snakes were allowed to travel voluntarily from point X to point
Y. Although all walls were force sensitive, only walls F, D and B
registered forces. Forces applied to wall D greatly exceeded those
of walls F and B. Thus, the majority of propulsion as a result of
lateral undulation in this apparatus is only possible after the snake
completes two lateral bends and can push back against wall D,
propelling itself forward. It should also be noted that prior to the
second lateral bend, the snakes used concertina locomotion rather
than typical undulatory locomotion.
For successful underground locomotion, sand lances must push
against the sand to propel themselves forward. Given the
experimental results of Gray and Lissmann and our observations
of abruptly ceasing tail movements, we hypothesize that sand
lances are only able to impart forces onto the substrate underground
once they have completed the second lateral bend (Gray and
Lissmann, 1950). Prior to this, an alternative mode (i.e. augmented
undulation of the aquatic portion of the tail) is needed to propel
the animal into the substrate. After the second lateral bend, there
is a section of the body that is normal to the desired direction of
travel. It is with this segment that the sand lance is able to push
posteriorly against sand – the analog of Gray and Lissmann’s wall
D. The fact that this perpendicular region of the body does not
move in world space (although it does travel posteriorly on the
fish’s body), suggests that the sand posterior to that segment is
capable of resisting static shear stress, and thus provides the
equivalent of a ground reaction force to propel the animal forward.
The fish’s 90 deg bends, we postulate, allow for stabilization and
direction of that force in an analogous way to Gray and Lissmann’s
walls F and B.
The point at which the sand lance has this ability (the time point
of the second lateral bend) coincides with the time point of cessation
in tail undulatory movements (Fig.6). We hypothesize that this
transition between Stages 2 and 3 marks the point of switching from
an aquatic to a terrestrial propulsive mode. We did not directly
measure muscle activity in this study, but we envision two possible
scenarios for patterns of muscle activation in the transition from
Stage 2 to Stage 3. First, the pattern of muscle activation could
remain constant and the material property of the environment could
be responsible for the observed change in kinematic pattern. Second,
this kinematic shift could be the result of a different pattern of muscle
activity – one more suited to subterranean locomotion. Our finding
that the aquatic tail undulations cease (Fig.3C,F,I), and that the tail
passively glides into the sand during the final stage of burrowing,
suggests that the wave of muscle activity passing down the body is
not continuous from head to tail. We hypothesize that the shift
between Stages 2 and 3 is the result of a shift in motor pattern. This
new motor pattern may only require activation of the anterior portion
of the axial musculature, allowing the tail portion of the body to
follow passively.
Sand–body interactions
The same morphological adaptation that allows these animals to
push off water and propel themselves through sand could explain
why they are able to push off and through the sandy substrate without
slipping. In an aquatic medium, despite having a pointed nose,

animals pushing on water induce flow, resulting in anguilliform
kinematics. However, once completely buried, the sand lance is still
pushing against and through the same medium – this time a
sand–water mix – without observable flow of that medium. We
explain this as an irregularity in how the substrate responds to
stresses (Maladen et al., 2009). In a frictional fluid such as the
sand–water mix, changes in weight distribution or areas where large
surfaces are pushing (such as the side of the body or the tail) would
be more supportive of shear stress than those where forces are
concentrated – such as the nose. By taking a cone-shaped head and
further supporting the pointed nose with a bony projection (Fig.2),
stresses could become even more concentrated, while, at the same
time remaining fortified. Interestingly, Horner and Jayne showed
that increasing the viscosity of an aquatic medium results in
increased slipping of undulatory waves in lungfish, which have a
less pronounced point at the anterior of the rostrum (Horner and
Jayne, 2008). This underscores the importance of sand particle
interactions beyond simple increases in viscosity, as well as the
importance of stress concentration to sand lance locomotion
mechanics. The mechanical explanation of exactly how the substrate
responds to this projection is beyond the scope of this paper, but
warrants further research.
One way for a sand lance to make its burrowing less energetically
expensive might be to fluidize sand by rapid vibration of its head.
This could change the water/sand ratio immediately around the head,
which is an important parameter in defining how such an environment
responds to forces exerted by an animal (Maladen et al., 2009).
However, we see no evidence that the sand directly contacting the
body of these fish is in any way fluidized, as the outline of the fishes
in our X-ray sequences did not become blurred at the initial stages
of burrowing. We also see no head yaw during slipping wave
locomotion (Fig.3H). The head of the sand lance, once buried, moves
much more slowly than the above-ground portion of the body, and
during Stage 1 it only translates anteriorly. The rapid, high-undulation
movements of the non-buried portion of the body must be sufficient
to propel the animal forward into the sand.
Comparison of air–sand transitions with water–sand
transitions
Many vertebrates must modulate their locomotor strategies in
response to the specific physical nature of their environment.
Several species of legged lizards dig or burrow to escape from
predators, heat and other adverse conditions. One such group is
the iguanid genus Uma, which inhabit sandy deserts. These animals
do not travel underground, but instead they use these burrowing
events to cover themselves in sand. The kinematic progression of
Uma burrowing bears a striking resemblance to that of sand lances
– summarized below, based on accounts in Stebbins (Stebbins,
1944) and Jayne and Daggy (Jayne and Daggy, 2000). During
surface locomotion, the lizards use typical four-limbed undulatory
locomotion. At the start of a burrowing sequence, the anteriorly
extended limbs are retracted to force the head into the ground using
the inertia of the body. As the head is thrust downward into the
sand, it undulates laterally at the neck, with quick, low-amplitude
oscillations. Next, the forelimbs are pressed flat against the body
and the hind limbs begin a vigorous push to submerge the majority
of the animal. Following this, the (non-undulating) tail is vibrated
to finish the burying task. Analogs of the lateral undulations of the
head and vibration of the tail in lizards are not observed in sand
lances. However, the progression begins with inertial thrusting of
the head into the sand (i.e. Stage 1 in the sand lance’s burrowing
sequence) followed by a propulsive stage (i.e. Stage 2) and
subsequently a retraction of the propulsive tools (legs and tail in
Uma and the tail in Ammodytes) into the substrate. The similarity
in progression of burrowing events in Uma and Ammodytes is
remarkable.
The sandfish – a member of the genus Scincus – is another lizard
the exhibits sand burrowing. The burrowing behavior of these
animals was recently investigated using NMR and X-ray imaging
(Baumgartner et al., 2008; Maladen et al., 2009). Unlike other lizard
species such as those mentioned above, sandfish fluidize the sandy
bed by high-speed undulations and capitalize on the low viscosity
of the air–sand mix to ‘swim’ using their limbs. The limbs are
thought to be used to modulate local compaction, thus providing a
local, ephemeral push point onto which the animal can exert force
(Baumgartner et al., 2008). Other investigators of sandfish
locomotion have found that arms are not used, but rather large
amplitude undulations are sufficient (Maladen et al., 2009). Maladen
et al. found, in contrast to the present study, that sandfish undulatory
locomotion involves slipping wave locomotion (Maladen et al.,
2009).
Concluding remarks
We have shown that a sand–water mix can respond differently to
different parts of the sand lance’s body; the pointed nose pushes
through sand, whereas the body pushes against sand. One avenue
that requires further exploration is experimental variation of the
resistance to shear stress of the substrate. Sand lances operate in
one manner in water and another in an undisturbed and settled
sand–water matrix. However, these effects may be due to local
variation in compaction, the viscosity of the substrate, a
combination of the two, or other aspects of the media. Experiments
that manipulate the rate of water flow through the sand separately
from sand density could help distinguish the relative roles of these
effects.
Substrate heterogeneity is another interesting avenue of research
that deserves exploration. Despite substrate homogeneity, we have
shown heterogeneity in the substrate’s reaction to forces exerted by
the sand lance. It is unclear whether this is a passive attribute of
the substrate or actively modulated by the sand lance to optimize
metabolic efficiency (or some other variable). Also, we have not
been able to examine whether sand lances are able to modify their
locomotion to take advantage of larger particles (pebbles and stones)
or heterogeneous substrates that would inevitably be present in their
natural environment.





